i
   
introduction
all praise is due to allah; and blessings and peace be upon 
his messenger and servant, muhammad, and upon his family and 
companions and whoever follows his guidance until the day of 
resurrection.
there is clearly a need for a presentation of the meanings of 
the holy quran in english which is precise enough to be useful as 
a reference for muslims and students of arabic yet also suitable for 
dawah purposes to non-muslims.  the arabic quran has always 
spoken for itself – to those who discover it for the first time as well 
as to those who study it in depth.  the general meanings in a 
translation should thus be correct, as far as human ability permits, 
and clear, in a readable and uncomplicated expression.
al-muntada al-islami has selected this edition by saheeh 
international (first published by abul-qasim publishing house, 
jeddah, saudi arabia) as the one most suitable for distribution.  
widely acknowledged for improvement over previous translations, 
its language closely adheres to that of the original text while 
remaining lucid and intelligible.
without going into excessive detail, a word is due about the 
methodology of this abbreviated edition.  three main objectives 
served as guidelines for the work:
1. to present correct meanings, as far as possible, in accordance
with the aqeedah of ahl as-sunnah wal-jamaah
2. to simplify and clarify the language for the benefit of all 
readers
3. to let the quran speak for itself, adding footnotes only 
where deemed necessary for explanation of points not readily 
understood or when more than one meaning is acceptable
each verse was reviewed in arabic with reference to several 
works of tafseer and grammar.  where differences arose, explanations
were generally taken from an authentic hadith or, in the absence of 

ii
such, those by the most knowledgable of the sahabah and tabiun
as quoted by ibn katheer.1
english word order was chosen to conform more closely with 
that of the arabic text.  this facilitates comparison for the student, 
and the reader is brought somewhat closer to the feel of the original 
expression.  transliterated arabic terms have been avoided 
wherever an english definition could serve, keeping exceptions to a 
minimum.  necessary clarifications or additions are given in 
footnotes.  care has also been taken to avoid the definitions of 
modern arabic dictionaries, which are often variant with the 
language of the quran and reflect the degree of change which has 
crept into the understanding of certain concepts with the passing of 
time.  instead, classical definitions were applied.
in compliance with standard regulations, words not derived 
from the arabic text but added for the purpose of clarification or 
the completion of english meaning have been enclosed in brackets.  
the exception is in regard to the frequently occurring expressions 
of "association of another with allah" (shirk) and "fearing allah" 
(taqwa), where the divine name, although not always included in 
the arabic text, is understood to be an integral part of that concept.  
throughout this work there is an endeavor to be consistent in the 
translation of oft-repeated words and phrases from the text.  there 
are, however, specific instances where some adjustment is required 
for accuracy, necessitating exceptions to the rule.
                                               
1the sahabah (companions) were those most familiar with the time, place 
and circumstances of each revelation due to their close contact with the 
prophet () and their eagerness to understand its every aspect.  at the 
same time, acute awareness of their accountability before allah prevented 
them from answering any questions or making assertions about that of 
which they were not completely certain.
the tabiun (followers) were students of the sahabah who mentioned the 
sources for whatever commentaries they offered.  of their statements only 
those based upon knowledge taken from the sahabah and upon the literal 
and logical meanings understood in the arabic language have been 
accepted.  explanations from other sources, such as jewish and christian 
narratives, are disregarded as unreliable.

iii
it is to be noted that arabic is a richer language than most.  
one well versed therein automatically perceives the multiple shades 
of meaning contained in particular words and phrases.  both early 
and later scholars emphasized some aspects more than others in 
their commentaries according to their own understanding, especially
in the absence of a relevant and authentic prophetic hadith.  any 
translation, which can reflect but one emphasis, must necessarily 
appear as a severe limitation.  although additions in brackets and 
explanatory footnotes are a partial remedy, it remains to be said that 
nothing can take the place of an in-depth study through the arabic 
medium itself.
arabic i s  richer not only in vocabulary but also in 
grammatical possibilities.  again, english is hardly comparable in 
this respect.  while precise and logical, arabic grammar is free of 
many limitations found in that of other languages, allowing for 
much wider expression.  for this reason, undoubtedly, it was the
most suitable of human tongues for conveyance of the creator's 
message to mankind.  due to the flexibility of arabic tenses, the 
quran is unique in its graphic portrayal of occurrences in the 
hereafter.  through use of the past tense the feeling is given that 
one is already there, having experienced what is described.  much 
of this is lost in english, where such descriptions are confined to 
"will" of the future.
those unfamiliar with quranic style might question the shifting
of pronouns in many verses, which is again, alien to english.  this 
cannot be eliminated in translation, however, without loss to intended
meanings.  far from showing inconsistency, such variations are not 
only correct in the original language but are the source of its beauty 
and precision, which unfortunately cannot be captured in another 
tongue.  it must be remembered that the arabic quran, being the 
words of allah, the exalted, far surpasses any human endeavor in 
linguistic excellence and is indeed the standard of perfection for all 
arabic expression.
as for the names and attributes of allah, their translation is 
surely an impossibility, for even in arabic they cannot represent 

iv
more than an approximation limited by human understanding.  to 
any description given by allah of himself in human terminology, 
the mind is required to apply the concept of absoluteness and 
perfection befitting him.  ibn taymiyyah stated consisely that true 
belief in allah (i.e., the correct islamic aqeedah of ahl as-sunnah) 
includes belief in whatever is described in his book (the quran) or
through his prophet (muhammad ) – belief that is free from 
distortion,2 suspension,3 qualification4 or comparison.5  the same 
can be said for those aspects of the unseen, such as paradise and 
hellfire, which are beyond the limits of human language and 
human imagination.
in this edition particular attention has been given to the names
"ar-rahman ar-raheem" (explained in a footnote to surah al-fatihah,
verse 1).  since both express certain aspects of divine mercy, "the 
most merciful" was used for ar-rahman and simply "the merciful" 
for ar-raheem. however, when they occur together, as in surah 
al-fatihah, the adjectives "entirely" and "especially" have been 
used to indicate the complementary relationship between the two.
to those who use this volume, it should be emphasized that 
whenever in doubt, one should refer to dictionaries of the classical 
language and to reliable arabic tafseer.  despite the many technicalities 
involved in a work of this sort that can predispose it to possible 
imperfections, al-muntada is optimistic that the present effort will 
contribute to a better understanding of the quran for english-speaking
people in every part of the world.
ultimately, all success is from allah,
and all praise is due to him.
                                               
2tahreef:  applying an allegorical meaning which will inevitably be 
incorrect since it is not based upon knowledge.
3tateel:  desertion of the concept altogether or denial that allah would have 
such an attribute or quality.
4takyeef:  attempting to explain how a certain attribute or quality could be, 
while such knowledge lies only with allah.
5tamtheel:  supposing that divine attributes resemble those of creation, 
while allah has said, "there is nothing like unto him." (42:11)

v
foreword
scholars have defined the quran as "the words of allah6
revealed to muhammad (), the recitation of which is a form of 
worship."7  this definition can be applied to no other book or speech.
reading and recitation of the quran is an important form of 
worship for which a muslim can expect reward and benefit in 
the hereafter.  there was a definite purpose behind the strong 
encouragement given by the prophet () in several authentic 
hadiths for recitation of the quran.8  that purpose is clearly stated 
in the quran itself:
﴿  َﺬﹶﱠ       
﴾
"a blessed book which we have revealed to you, [o 
muhammad], that they might reflect upon its verses 
and that those of understanding would be reminded." 9
﴿ﺎ       
﴾
"then do they not reflect upon the quran, or are 
there locks upon [their] hearts?" 10
﴿  ِ  ﹶﺎ     
 
  ﺧ
﴾
"then do they not reflect upon the quran?  if it had 
been from [any] other than allah, they would have 
found within it much contradiction." 11
                                               
6"allah" is the proper name of god and is not used to denote any other 
being.  therefore, this name is retained in translation to other languages.
7al-qattan, manna, mabahith f¥ ulum il-quran, p. 21.
8the recitation whose merits are mentioned in the hadiths is that of the 
actual words of allah in their original arabic form.  nevertheless, any 
effort toward understanding the quran's meanings in order to increase faith, 
obtain guidance and live by its ordinances is in itself a deed of great merit.
9surah saad, 38:29.
10, 47:24.
11surah an-nisa, 4:82.

vi
shaykh al-islam ahmad bin taymiyyah pointed out in his 
fatawa that even the ordinary words of men are spoken or written 
for the purpose of being understood by the listener or reader and 
that the quran is surely more worthy of being understood than the 
words of men.  many scholars have stated that it is the responsibility
of all muslims to learn the arabic language in order to understand 
the quran.  ibn katheer, author of the well-known arabic tafseer,
maintained that it is also the duty of muslim scholars to make its 
meanings known to the people.
no person can afford to be ignorant of the quran, for it is the 
constitution revealed by allah to regulate and govern human life.  it 
speaks with the perfect knowledge of the creator about his 
creation.  it exposes the truth and invites man to the way of truth.  it 
contains important information about human destiny and that of the 
individual.  it educates and raises men to the highest moral, 
intellectual and social level when they strive to comprehend it and 
apply its teachings to life.
moreover, it is the actual words of allah – not created, but
revealed by him through the angel gabriel to a human messenger, 
muhammad bin abdullah (), for the benefit of humanity.  it is 
an eternal miracle given to the final prophet, muhammad (), as 
proof of his prophethood and a challenge to all succeeding generations.
it is of unique and inimitable quality.  revealed fourteen centuries 
ago, it remains today completely intact and unaltered in its original 
arabic form.
what does one discover when he understands the meanings of 
the quran?  the answers to this question can be classified in four 
main categories:
1. that he can know his creator as he has described himself
2. that he can know the purpose of life on this earth and what 
is expected of every person during this life
3. that he becomes aware of the consequences of his attitudes 
and his behavior
4. how he should relate to all things – to allah by worship 
and obedience, to his fellow man by justice to all or by 

vii
ihsan (a higher degree),12 and to the universe in general by 
putting those things under his control to good use
this divine message was revealed to confirm and renew the 
relationship between man and his creator and to reinstate the 
sincere and correct worship of the one true god, allah (subhanahu 
wa taala), who says:
﴿  ﹺ   
﴾
"then let them respond to me and believe in me that 
they may be [rightly] guided." 13
                                               
12ihsan has been defined by the prophet () as "worshipping allah as if 
you see him" or generally, doing more than one's duty and expecting less 
than one's right.
13surah al-baqarah, 2:186.

viii
history of quran compilation
1. in addition to its memorization in entirety by many of the 
sahabah (the prophet's companions), written recording of the 
quran began during the prophet's lifetime.  as it was recited by 
him, his scribes wrote down the revelation on pieces of leather, 
bone and palm leaves, and its verses were ordered and arranged 
as allah revealed. initially, the quran was not compiled in one 
volume, although some of the sahabah had made personal copies 
for themselves after memorizing it from the prophet ().
2. collecting and compiling the quran followed soon after the 
prophet's death, during the caliphate of abu bakr as-siddeeq.  
upon the advice of umar bin al-khattab, abu bakr charged 
zayd bin thabit to bring all of the quran together on written 
sheets (suhuf).  these were checked for accuracy against what 
had been memorized by a great number of the sahabah.  after 
the death of abu bakr and then umar, the collection remained 
with umar's daughter, hafsah, who was also the prophet's wife.
3. the standardization of one authentic volume (mushaf) took place 
during the caliphate of uthman bin affan.  the copy kept by 
hafsah was obtained and, upon the order of uthman, it was 
transcribed with great care by four of the most knowledgeable 
scribes:  zayd bin thabit, abdullah bin az-zubayr, saeed bin 
al-aas and abdur-rahman bin al-harith bin hisham.  copies 
were sent to each of the various islamic territories to replace all 
other collections in circulation.  uthman kept a copy in madinah,
and the original suhuf were returned to hafsah.  there is consensus
by the sahabah that what is contained in this standard copy is the 
true revelation received by muhammad () from allah, the exalted.
4. the mushaf of uthman had no dots or vowel marks, as they 
were unnecessary for those who knew the pure arabic tongue.  
with the spread of islam among other peoples, there arose a 
need to guard against incorrect reading and misinterpretation of 
the quran.  at first, scholars were reluctant about these additions,
but it was finally agreed that they did not affect the text itself and 

ix
were merely aids to proper pronunciation and understanding.  
they were introduced in three stages:
short vowel sounds were first represented by dots positioned 
above, below and to the left of the letter.  this system was 
introduced during the caliphate of muawiyah bin ab¥ sufyan
by abul-aswad ad-duli after he had heard serious errors in 
recitation of the quran.
similarly written letters were differentiated by another system 
of dots above and below them during the caliphate of abdul-
malik bin marwan.  at the caliph's order, his governor, al-hajjaj, 
appointed two scholars, nasr bin ô§im and hayy bin yamur, 
to implement this improvement.
the presently used system of short vowel symbols was devised
by al-khaleel bin ahmad al-faraheedi during the abbasine 
period.

x
merits of particular surahs
and verses
1. ab´ saeed rafi bin al-mualla said:  "allah's messenger () said,
'shall i not teach you the most superior surah in the quran 
before you leave the mosque?'  he took me by the hand.  when 
we were about to leave, i said, 'o messenger of allah, you said 
you would teach me the most superior surah in the quran.'  
the prophet () said, '"praise to allah, lord of the worlds"
[i.e., surah al-fatihah]; it is the seven repeatedly recited verses 
and the magnificent quran which was given to me.'" (narrated 
by al-bukhari.)
2. ibn abbas narrated:  "while gabriel was sitting with the 
prophet (), he heard a creaking sound above him, and raising 
his head he said, 'this is a gate opened in heaven today which 
has never been opened before.'  then when an angel descended 
through it, he said, 'this is an angel that came down to earth 
who has never come down before.'  he gave a salutation and 
said, 'rejoice in two lights brought to you which have not been 
brought to any prophet before you:  fatihat al-kitab and the 
last verses of surah al-baqarah.  you will not recite a letter of 
them without being given the blessing it contains.'" (narrated 
by muslim.)
3. ab´ hurayrah narrated that the prophet () said:  "do not 
make your houses into graveyards.  the devil flees from the house
in which surah al-baqarah is recited." (narrated by muslim.)
4. ubayy bin kab narrated:  "allah's messenger () said, 'abul-
mundhir, do you know which verse of allah's book you have is 
greatest?'  i replied, 'allah – there is no deity except him, the 
ever-living, the sustainer of [all] existence.'
[2:255]  
thereupon he struck me on the breast and said, 'may knowledge
be pleasant for you, abul-mundhir.'" (narrated by muslim.)
5. ab´ masud al-badr¥ narrated that the prophet () said:  "if 
anyone recites the last two verses of surah al-baqarah at night, 
it will be sufficient for him." (narrated by al-bukhari and muslim.)

xi
6. ab´ umamah al-bahil¥ narrated that he heard allah's messenger () 
say:  "recite the quran, for on the day of resurrection it will 
come as an intercessor for those who recite it.  recite the two 
bright ones, al-baqarah and ali imran, for on the day of 
resurrection they will come as two clouds or two shades or two 
flocks of birds in ranks pleading for those who recite them.  
recite surah al-baqarah, for reading it produces blessing, and 
abandoning it produces regret.  and magicians are unable to 
recite it." (narrated by muslim.)
7. ab´ darda narrated that the prophet () said:  "if anyone 
learns by heart the first ten verses of surah al-kahf, he will be 
protected from the dajjal."  in another version, he said:  "...at 
the end of surah al-kahf."  (narrated by muslim.)
8. ab´ saeed narrated that the prophet () said:  "if anyone 
recites surah al-kahf on friday, light will shine brightly for him
until the next friday." (narrated by al-hakim and al-bayhaqi –
an authentic hadith.)
9. ibn masud narrated that the prophet () said:  "surah tabarak
prevents [whoever reads it] from the punishment of the grave." 
(narrated by al-hakim and ab´ naeem – an authentic hadith.)
10. ibn umar narrated that the prophet () said:  "whoever would 
like to see the day of resurrection as if with his own eyes may 
recite surahs at-takweer, al-infitar and al-inshiqaq." (narrated 
by ahmad, at-tirmidhi and al-hakim – a good hadith.)
11. ab´ saeed al-khudri narrated that the prophet () said 
regarding, "say he is allah, [who is] one" (i.e., surah al-ikhlas):  
"by him in whose hand my life is, this surah is equal to one
third of the quran."  and in another hadith:  "the prophet ()
said to his companions, 'is it difficult for any of you to recite 
one third of the quran in one night?'  this was difficult for 
them, so they said, 'who among us has the ability to do so, o 
messenger of allah?'  allah's messenger () replied, '"say, 
he is allah, the one; allah, the eternal, absolute" [i.e., 
surah al-ikhlas] is equal to one third of the quran.'" (narrated 
by al-bukhari.)

xii
12. muadh bin anas narrated that the prophet () said:  "if 
someone recites, 'say, he is allah, the one' ten times, allah 
will build for him a palace in paradise." (narrated by ahmad.)
13. uqbah bin ômir narrated that allah's messenger () said:  
"what wonderful verses have been sent down tonight.  the like 
of them has never been seen!  they are:  'say, i seek refuge in 
the lord of the dawn,' and 'say, i seek refuge in the lord of 
men.'" (i.e., surahs al-falaq and an-nas) (narrated by muslim.)
14. ôaishah narrated:  "when the prophet () went to bed every night,
he used to cup his hands together and blow over them after 
reciting surah al-ikhlas, surah al-falaq and surah an-nas and 
then rub his hands over whatever parts of his body he was able 
to, starting with his head, face and front of his body.  he used 
to do that three times." (narrated by al-bukhari and muslim.)
15. abdullah bin yusuf said that malik reported from ibn shihab from 
urwah that ôaishah narrated:  "whenever allah's messenger ()
became sick, he would recite the muawwidhat [i.e., surahs 
al-falaq and an-nas] and then blow over his body.  but when he
became seriously ill, i used to recite them and rub his hands over
his body hoping for their blessings." (narrated by al-bukhari.)

surah 1 – al-fatihah
juz 1
1
surah al-fatihah
1
1. in the name of allah,2 the entirely merciful, the especially merciful.3
2. [all] praise is [due] to allah, lord4 of the worlds –
3. the entirely merciful, the especially merciful,
4. sovereign of the day of recompense.5
5. it is you we worship and you we ask for help.
6. guide us to the straight path –
7. the path of those upon whom you have bestowed favor, not of 
those who have evoked [your] anger or of those who are astray.
                                               
1al-fatihah:  the opening (of the quran).  note:  surah titles are not an 
integral part of the quran.  a distinguishing word in a particular surah or a 
word defining its subject matter often became a common means of 
identification among the prophet's companions and later scholars.  although
some names, such as al-fatihah, were used by the prophet () in reference 
to a particular surah, they were not specifically designated by him as titles.
2allah is a proper name belonging only to the one almighty god, creator 
and sustainer of the heavens and the earth and all that is within them, the 
eternal and absolute, to whom alone all worship is due.
3ar-rahman and ar-raheem are two names of allah derived from the word 
"rahmah" (mercy).  in arabic grammar both are intensive forms of 
"merciful" (i.e., extremely merciful).  a complimentary and comprehensive 
meaning is intended by using both together.
rahman is used only to describe allah, while raheem might be used to 
describe a person as well.  the prophet () was described in the quran as 
raheem.  rahman is above the human level (i.e., intensely merciful).  since 
one usually understands intensity to be something of short duration, allah 
describes himself also as raheem (i.e., continually merciful).
rahman also carries a wider meaning – merciful to all creation.  justice 
is a part of this mercy.  raheem includes the concept of speciality –
especially and specifically merciful to the believers.  forgiveness is a part 
of this mercy.  (see al-qurtubi's al-jamiu li ahkamil-quran, pp. 103-107.)
4when referring to allah (subhanahu wa taala), the arabic term "rabb" 
(translated as "lord") includes all of the following meanings:  "owner, 
master, ruler, controller, sustainer, provider, guardian and caretaker."
5i.e., repayment and compensation for whatever was earned of good or evil 
during life on this earth.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
2
surah al-baqarah
6
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, meem.7
2. this is the book about which there is no doubt, a guidance for 
those conscious of allah8 –
3. who believe in the unseen, establish prayer,9 and spend out of 
what we10 have provided for them,
4. and who believe in what has been revealed to you, [o 
muhammad], and what was revealed before you, and of the 
hereafter they are certain [in faith].
5. those are upon [right] guidance from their lord, and it is those 
who are the successful.
6. indeed, those who disbelieve11 – it is all the same for them 
whether you warn them or do not warn them – they will not 
believe.
7. allah has set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing, 
and over their vision is a veil.12  and for them is a great 
punishment.
                                               
6al-baqarah:  the cow.  the name is taken from the story in verses 67-73.
7these are among the fourteen opening letters which occur in various 
combinations at the beginning of twenty-nine surahs in the quran.  
although there has been much speculation as to their meaning, it was not, 
in fact, revealed by allah to anyone and is known only to him.
8literally, "those who have taqwa," i.e., who have piety, righteousness, fear 
and love of allah, and who take great care to avoid his displeasure.
9at its proper times and according to its specified conditions.
10it is to be noted that the reference of allah (subhanahu wa taala) to 
himself as "we" in many quranic verses is necessarily understood in the 
arabic language to denote grandeur and power, as opposed to the more 
intimate singular form "i" used in specific instances.
11literally, "cover" or "conceal" (faith or truth).
12a covering preventing them from discerning guidance.  this condition is a 
direct result of their arrogance and persistence in sin.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
3
8.
and of the people are some who say, "we believe in allah 
and the last day," but they are not believers.
9.
they [think to] deceive allah and those who believe, but they 
deceive not except themselves and perceive [it] not.
10.
in their hearts is disease, so allah has increased their disease;13
and for them is a painful punishment because they [habitually] 
used to lie.
11.
and when it is said to them, "do not cause corruption on the 
earth," they say, "we are but reformers."
12.
unquestionably, it is they who are the corrupters, but they 
perceive [it] not.
13.
and when it is said to them, "believe as the people have 
believed," they say, "should we believe as the foolish have 
believed?"  unquestionably, it is they who are the foolish, but 
they know [it] not.
14.
and when they meet those who believe, they say, "we believe";
but when they are alone with their evil ones, they say, 
"indeed, we are with you; we were only mockers."
15.
[but] allah mocks them and prolongs them in their transgression
[while] they wander blindly.
16.
those are the ones who have purchased error [in exchange] 
for guidance, so their transaction has brought no profit, nor 
were they guided.
17.
their example is that of one who kindled a fire, but when it 
illuminated what was around him, allah took away their light 
and left them in darkness [so] they could not see.
18.
deaf, dumb and blind – so they will not return [to the right 
path].
19.
or [it is] like a rainstorm from the sky within which is 
darkness, thunder and lightning.  they put their fingers in 
                                               
13the "disease" mentioned here includes doubt, hypocrisy, arrogance and 
disbelief.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
4
their ears against the thunderclaps in dread of death.  but 
allah is encompassing14 of the disbelievers.
20.
the lightning almost snatches away their sight.  every time it 
lights [the way] for them, they walk therein; but when darkness
comes over them, they stand [still].  and if allah had willed, 
he could have taken away their hearing and their sight.  
indeed, allah is over all things competent.
21.
o mankind, worship your lord, who created you and those 
before you, that you may become righteous –
22.
[he] who made for you the earth a bed [spread out] and the 
sky a ceiling and sent down from the sky, rain and brought forth
thereby fruits as provision for you.  so do not attribute to allah 
equals while you know [that there is nothing similar to him].
23.
and if you are in doubt about what we have sent down [i.e., 
the quran] upon our servant [i.e., prophet muhammad ()], 
then produce a surah the like thereof and call upon your witnesses
[i.e., supporters] other than allah, if you should be truthful.
24.
but if you do not – and you will never be able to – then fear 
the fire, whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for the 
disbelievers.
25.
and give good tidings to those who believe and do righteous 
deeds that they will have gardens [in paradise] beneath which 
rivers flow.  whenever they are provided with a provision of 
fruit therefrom, they will say, "this is what we were provided 
                                               
14allah states in the quran that he has certain attributes such as hearing, 
sight, hands, face, mercy, anger, coming, encompassing, being above the 
throne, etc.  yet, he has disassociated himself from the limitations of 
human attributes or human imagination.  correct islamic belief requires 
faith in the existence of these attributes as allah has described them 
without applying to them any allegorical meanings or attempting to 
explain how a certain quality could be (while this is known only to allah) 
and without comparing them to creation or denying that he (subhanahu 
wa taala) would have such a quality.  his attributes are befitting to him 
alone, and "there is nothing like unto him." (42:11)

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
5
with before."  and it is given to them in likeness.  and they 
will have therein purified spouses, and they will abide therein 
eternally.
26.
indeed, allah is not timid to present an example – that of a 
mosquito or what is smaller15 than it.  and those who have 
believed know that it is the truth from their lord.  but as for 
those who disbelieve, they say, "what did allah intend by this 
as an example?"  he misleads many thereby and guides many 
thereby.  and he misleads not except the defiantly disobedient,
27.
who break the covenant of allah after contracting it and sever 
that which allah has ordered to be joined and cause corruption
on earth.  it is those who are the losers.
28.
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were lifeless and 
he brought you to life; then he will cause you to die, then he 
will bring you [back] to life, and then to him you will be 
returned.
29.
it is he who created for you all of that which is on the earth.  
then he directed himself16 to the heaven, [his being above 
all creation], and made them seven heavens, and he is knowing
of all things.
30.
and [mention, o muhammad], when your lord said to the angels,
"indeed, i will make upon the earth a successive authority."17  
they said, "will you place upon it one who causes corruption 
therein and sheds blood, while we declare your praise and 
sanctify you?"  he [allah] said, "indeed, i know that which 
you do not know."
31.
and he taught adam the names – all of them.  then he 
showed them to the angels and said, "inform me of the names 
of these, if you are truthful."
32.
they said, "exalted are you; we have no knowledge except 
                                               
15literally, "above it," i.e., greater in smallness.
16see footnote to 2:19.
17khalifah:  successor, or generations of man, one following another.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
6
what you have taught us.  indeed, it is you who is the knowing,
the wise."
33.
he said, "o adam, inform them of their names."  and when 
he had informed them of their names, he said, "did i not tell 
you that i know the unseen [aspects] of the heavens and the earth?  
and i know what you reveal and what you have concealed."
34.
and [mention] when we said to the angels, "prostrate before 
adam"; so they prostrated, except for iblees.18  he refused and 
was arrogant and became of the disbelievers.
35.
and we said, "o adam, dwell, you and your wife, in paradise 
and eat therefrom in [ease and] abundance from wherever you 
will.  but do not approach this tree, lest you be among the 
wrongdoers."
36.
but satan caused them to slip out of it and removed them 
from that [condition] in which they had been.  and we said, 
"go down, [all of you], as enemies to one another, and you 
will have upon the earth a place of settlement and provision 
for a time."
37.
then adam received from his lord [some] words,19 and he 
accepted his repentance.  indeed, it is he who is the accepting 
of repentance, the merciful.
38.
we said, "go down from it, all of you.  and when guidance 
comes to you from me, whoever follows my guidance – there 
will be no fear concerning them, nor will they grieve.
39.
and those who disbelieve and deny our signs – those will be 
companions of the fire; they will abide therein eternally."
40.
o children of israel, remember my favor which i have bestowed
upon you and fulfill my covenant [upon you] that i will fulfill 
your covenant [from me], and be afraid of [only] me.
                                               
18the proper name of satan, who was not an angel but from the jinn, as 
stated in 18:50.  done in obedience to allah, this prostration was one of 
respect, not worship.
19allah taught adam words of repentance that would be acceptable to him.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
7
41.
and believe in what i have sent down confirming that which is
[already] with you, and be not the first to disbelieve in it.  and 
do not exchange my signs for a small price, and fear [only] me.
42.
and do not mix the truth with falsehood or conceal the truth 
while you know [it].
43.
and establish prayer and give zakah20 and bow with those 
who bow [in worship and obedience].
44.
do you order righteousness of the people and forget21 yourselves
while you recite the scripture?  then will you not reason?
45.
and seek help through patience and prayer; and indeed, it is 
difficult except for the humbly submissive [to allah]
46.
who are certain that they will meet their lord and that they 
will return to him.
47.
o children of israel, remember my favor that i have bestowed 
upon you and that i preferred you over the worlds [i.e., peoples].
48.
and fear a day when no soul will suffice for another soul22 at all,
nor will intercession be accepted from it, nor will compensation
be taken from it, nor will they be aided.
49.
and [recall] when we saved you [i.e., your forefathers] from 
the people of pharaoh, who afflicted you with the worst torment, 
slaughtering your [newborn] sons and keeping your females alive.  
and in that was a great trial from your lord.
50.
and [recall] when we parted the sea for you and saved you and 
drowned the people of pharaoh while you were looking on.
51.
and [recall] when we made an appointment with moses for 
forty nights.  then you took [for worship] the calf after him 
[i.e., his departure], while you were wrongdoers.
                                               
20an annual expenditure for the benefit of the islamic community (see 9:60) 
required of those muslims who have excess wealth.  prayer and zakah are 
among the pillars of islam.
21make exceptions of.
22i.e., fulfill what is due from it.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
8
52.
then we forgave you after that so perhaps you would be grateful.
53.
and [recall] when we gave moses the scripture and criterion23
that perhaps you would be guided.
54.
and [recall] when moses said to his people, "o my people, 
indeed you have wronged yourselves by your taking of the calf
[for worship].  so repent to your creator and kill yourselves 
[i.e., the guilty among you].  that is best for [all of] you in the 
sight of your creator."  then he accepted your repentance; 
indeed, he is the accepting of repentance, the merciful.
55.
and [recall] when you said, "o moses, we will never believe 
you until we see allah outright"; so the thunderbolt took you 
while you were looking on.
56.
then we revived you after your death that perhaps you would 
be grateful.
57.
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna 
and quails, [saying], "eat from the good things with which we 
have provided you."  and they wronged us not – but they 
were [only] wronging themselves.
58.
and [recall] when we said, "enter this city [i.e., jerusalem] 
and eat from it wherever you will in [ease and] abundance, 
and enter the gate bowing humbly24 and say, 'relieve us of our 
burdens [i.e., sins].'  we will [then] forgive your sins for you, 
and we will increase the doers of good [in goodness and reward]."
59.
but those who wronged changed [those words] to a statement 
other than that which had been said to them, so we sent down 
upon those who wronged a punishment [i.e., plague] from the 
sky because they were defiantly disobeying.
60.
and [recall] when moses prayed for water for his people, so 
we said, "strike with your staff the stone."  and there gushed 
forth from it twelve springs, and every people [i.e., tribe] knew
                                               
23differentiating between truth and falsehood.  "the scripture and criterion" 
refers to the torah.
24in gratitude to allah and admission of sin.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
9
its watering place.  "eat and drink from the provision of allah,
and do not commit abuse on the earth, spreading corruption."
61.
and [recall] when you said, "o moses, we can never endure 
one [kind of] food.  so call upon your lord to bring forth for 
us from the earth its green herbs and its cucumbers and its 
garlic and its lentils and its onions."  [moses] said, "would 
you exchange what is better for what is less?  go into [any] 
settlement and indeed, you will have what you have asked."  
and they were covered with humiliation and poverty and 
returned with anger from allah [upon them].  that was because
they [repeatedly] disbelieved in the signs of allah and killed 
the prophets without right.  that was because they disobeyed 
and were [habitually] transgressing.
62.
indeed, those who believed and those who were jews or 
christians or sabeans [before prophet muhammad ()] –
those [among them] who believed in allah and the last day 
and did righteousness – will have their reward with their lord, 
and no fear will there be concerning them, nor will they grieve.25
63.
and [recall] when we took your covenant, [o children of israel, 
to abide by the torah] and we raised over you the mount, 
[saying], "take what we have given you with determination and 
remember what is in it that perhaps you may become righteous."
64.
then you turned away after that.  and if not for the favor of 
allah upon you and his mercy, you would have been among 
the losers.
65.
and you had already known about those who transgressed 
among you concerning the sabbath, and we said to them, "be 
apes, despised."
66.
and we made it a deterrent punishment for those who were 
present and those who succeeded [them] and a lesson for 
those who fear allah.
                                               
25after the coming of prophet muhammad () no religion other than islam 
is acceptable to allah, as stated in 3:85.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
10
67.
and [recall] when moses said to his people, "indeed, allah 
commands you to slaughter a cow."  they said, "do you take 
us in ridicule?"  he said, "i seek refuge in allah from being 
among the ignorant."
68.
they said, "call upon your lord to make clear to us what it 
is."  [moses] said, "[allah] says, 'it is a cow which is neither 
old nor virgin, but median between that,' so do what you are 
commanded."
69.
they said, "call upon your lord to show us what is her 
color."  he said, "he says, 'it is a yellow cow, bright in color –
pleasing to the observers.'"
70.
they said, "call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is.  
indeed, [all] cows look alike to us.  and indeed we, if allah 
wills, will be guided."
71.
he said, "he says, 'it is a cow neither trained to plow the earth 
nor to irrigate the field, one free from fault with no spot upon 
her.'"  they said, "now you have come with the truth."  so 
they slaughtered her, but they could hardly do it.
72.
and [recall] when you slew a man and disputed26 over it, but 
allah was to bring out that which you were concealing.
73.
so we said, "strike him [i.e., the slain man] with part of it."27  
thus does allah bring the dead to life, and he shows you his 
signs that you might reason.
74.
then your hearts became hardened after that, being like stones 
or even harder.  for indeed, there are stones from which rivers 
burst forth, and there are some of them that split open and 
water comes out, and there are some of them that fall down 
for fear of allah.  and allah is not unaware of what you do.
75.
do you covet [the hope, o believers], that they would believe 
for you while a party of them used to hear the words of allah 
                                               
26i.e., exchanged accusations and denials.
27i.e., the cow.  thereupon, allah restored life to the man, who informed 
them of his murderer.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
11
and then distort it [i.e., the torah] after they had understood it 
while they were knowing?
76.
and when they meet those who believe, they say, "we have 
believed"; but when they are alone with one another, they say, 
"do you talk to them about what allah has revealed to you so 
they can argue with you about it before your lord?"  then 
will you not reason?
77.
but do they not know that allah knows what they conceal and 
what they declare?
78.
and among them are unlettered ones who do not know the 
scripture except [indulgement in] wishful thinking, but they 
are only assuming.
79.
so woe28 to those who write the "scripture" with their own 
hands, then say, "this is from allah," in order to exchange it 
for a small price.  woe to them for what their hands have 
written and woe to them for what they earn.
80.
and they say, "never will the fire touch us, except for [a few] 
numbered days."  say, "have you taken a covenant with allah?  
for allah will never break his covenant.  or do you say about 
allah that which you do not know?"
81.
yes, [on the contrary], whoever earns evil and his sin has 
encompassed him – those are the companions of the fire; they 
will abide therein eternally.
82.
but they who believe and do righteous deeds – those are the 
companions of paradise; they will abide therein eternally.
83.
and [recall] when we took the covenant from the children of 
israel, [enjoining upon them], "do not worship except allah; 
and to parents do good and to relatives, orphans, and the 
needy.  and speak to people good [words] and establish 
prayer and give zakah."  then you turned away, except a few 
of you, and you were refusing.
                                               
28i.e., death and destruction.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
12
84.
and [recall] when we took your covenant, [saying], "do not 
shed your [i.e., each other's] blood or evict one another from 
your homes."  then you acknowledged [this] while you were 
witnessing.
85.
then, you are those [same ones who are] killing one another and
evicting a party of your people from their homes, cooperating 
against them in sin and aggression.  and if they come to you 
as captives, you ransom them, although their eviction was 
forbidden to you.  so do you believe in part of the scripture 
and disbelieve in part?  then what is the recompense for those 
who do that among you except disgrace in worldly life; and on 
the day of resurrection they will be sent back to the severest 
of punishment.  and allah is not unaware of what you do.
86.
those are the ones who have bought the life of this world [in 
exchange] for the hereafter, so the punishment will not be 
lightened for them, nor will they be aided.
87.
and we did certainly give moses the scripture [i.e., the torah]
and followed up after him with messengers.  and we gave 
jesus, the son of mary, clear proofs and supported him with 
the pure spirit [i.e., the angel gabriel].  but is it [not] that 
every time a messenger came to you, [o children of israel], 
with what your souls did not desire, you were arrogant?  and a
party [of messengers] you denied and another party you killed.
88.
and they said, "our hearts are wrapped."29  but, [in fact], 
allah has cursed them for their disbelief, so little is it that they 
believe.
89.
and when there came to them a book [i.e., the quran] from 
allah confirming that which was with them – although before 
they used to pray for victory against those who disbelieved –
but [then] when there came to them that which they recognized,
they disbelieved in it; so the curse of allah will be upon the 
disbelievers.
                                               
29covered or sealed against reception of allah's word.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
13
90.
how wretched is that for which they sold themselves – that 
they would disbelieve in what allah has revealed through 
[their] outrage that allah would send down his favor upon 
whom he wills from among his servants.  so they returned 
having [earned] wrath upon wrath.  and for the disbelievers is 
a humiliating punishment.
91.
and when it is said to them, "believe in what allah has revealed,"
they say, "we believe [only] in what was revealed to us."  
and they disbelieve in what came after it, while it is the truth 
confirming that which is with them.  say, "then why did you 
kill the prophets of allah before, if you are [indeed] believers?"
92.
and moses had certainly brought you clear proofs.  then you 
took the calf [in worship] after that, while you were wrongdoers.
93.
and [recall] when we took your covenant and raised over you 
the mount, [saying], "take what we have given you with 
determination and listen."  they said [instead], "we hear and 
disobey."  and their hearts absorbed [the worship of] the calf 
because of their disbelief.  say, "how wretched is that which 
your faith enjoins upon you, if you should be believers."
94.
say, [o muhammad], "if the home of the hereafter with allah 
is for you alone and not the [other] people, then wish for 
death, if you should be truthful."
95.
but never will they wish for it, ever, because of what their hands 
have put forth.  and allah is knowing of the wrongdoers.
96.
and you will surely find them the most greedy of people for 
life – [even] more than those who associate others with allah.  
one of them wishes that he could be granted life a thousand 
years, but it would not remove him in the least from the 
[coming] punishment that he should be granted life.  and 
allah is seeing of what they do.
97.
say, "whoever is an enemy to gabriel – it is [none but] he 
who has brought it [i.e., the quran] down upon your heart, [o 
muhammad], by permission of allah, confirming that which 
was before it and as guidance and good tidings for the believers."

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
14
98. whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his messengers
and gabriel and michael – then indeed, allah is an enemy to 
the disbelievers.
99. and we have certainly revealed to you verses [which are] 
clear proofs, and no one would deny them except the defiantly 
disobedient.
100. is it not [true] that every time they took a covenant a party of 
them threw it away?  but, [in fact], most of them do not believe.
101. and when a messenger from allah came to them confirming 
that which was with them, a party of those who had been given 
the scripture threw the scripture of allah [i.e., the torah] 
behind their backs as if they did not know [what it contained].
102. and they followed [instead] what the devils had recited during
the reign of solomon.  it was not solomon who disbelieved, 
but the devils disbelieved, teaching people magic and that which
was revealed to the two angels at babylon, harut and marut.  
but they [i.e., the two angels] do not teach anyone unless they 
say, "we are a trial, so do not disbelieve [by practicing magic]."30  
and [yet] they learn from them that by which they cause 
separation between a man and his wife.  but they do not harm 
anyone through it except by permission of allah.  and they 
[i.e., people] learn what harms them and does not benefit them.  
but they [i.e., the children of israel] certainly knew that whoever
purchased it [i.e., magic] would not have in the hereafter any 
share.  and wretched is that for which they sold themselves, if 
they only knew.
103. and if they had believed and feared allah, then the reward 
from allah would have been [far] better, if they only knew.
104. o you who have believed, say not [to allah's messenger], 
"raina" but say, "unthurna"31 and listen.  and for the 
                                               
30they warn people against the misuse of what they have learned.
31the word "raina " in arabic literally means "consider us," i.e., give us 
time to hear you and listen to us.  the jews used to use the same word
with the meaning of an insult.  therefore, the believers were ordered to 

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
15
disbelievers is a painful punishment.
105. neither those who disbelieve from the people of the scripture 
[i.e., the jews and christians] nor the polytheists wish that 
any good should be sent down to you from your lord.  but 
allah selects for his mercy whom he wills, and allah is the 
possessor of great bounty.
106. we do not abrogate a verse or cause it to be forgotten except 
that we bring forth [one] better than it or similar to it.  do you 
not know that allah is over all things competent?
107. do you not know that to allah belongs the dominion of the 
heavens and the earth and [that] you have not besides allah 
any protector or any helper?
108. or do you intend to ask32 your messenger as moses was asked 
before?  and whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has certainly
strayed from the soundness of the way.
109. many of the people of the scripture wish they could turn you 
back to disbelief after you have believed, out of envy from 
themselves [even] after the truth has become clear to them.  
so pardon and overlook until allah delivers his command.  
indeed, allah is over all things competent.
110. and establish prayer and give zakah, and whatever good you 
put forward for yourselves – you will find it with allah.  
indeed allah, of what you do, is seeing.
111. and they say, "none will enter paradise except one who is a 
jew or a christian."  that is [merely] their wishful thinking.  
say, "produce your proof, if you should be truthful."
112. yes, [on the contrary], whoever submits his face [i.e., self] in 
islam to allah while being a doer of good will have his reward
with his lord.  and no fear will there be concerning them, nor 
will they grieve.
                                                                      
avoid this expression and use instead the word "unthurna," i.e., "wait for 
us [so that we may understand]."
32i.e., persistently question or, as in the case of the disbelievers, demand a 
miracle of the prophet ().

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
16
113. the jews say, "the christians have nothing [true] to stand on,"
and the christians say, "the jews have nothing to stand on," 
although they [both] recite the scripture.  thus do those who 
know not [i.e., the polytheists] speak the same as their words.  
but allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection
concerning that over which they used to differ.
114. and who are more unjust than those who prevent the name of 
allah from being mentioned [i.e., praised] in his mosques and 
strive toward their destruction.  it is not for them to enter them 
except in fear.  for them in this world is disgrace, and they 
will have in the hereafter a great punishment.
115. and to allah belongs the east and the west.  so wherever you 
[might] turn, there is the face33 of allah.  indeed, allah is 
all-encompassing and knowing.
116. they say, "allah has taken a son."  exalted is he!34  rather, to 
him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth.  all are 
devoutly obedient to him,
117. originator of the heavens and the earth.  when he decrees a 
matter, he only says to it, "be," and it is.
118. those who do not know say, "why does allah not speak to us 
or there come to us a sign?"  thus spoke those before them 
like their words.  their hearts resemble each other.  we have 
shown clearly the signs to a people who are certain [in faith].
119. indeed, we have sent you, [o muhammad], with the truth as 
a bringer of good tidings and a warner, and you will not be 
asked about the companions of hellfire.
120. and never will the jews and the christians approve of you 
until you follow their religion.  say, "indeed, the guidance of 
allah is the [only] guidance."  if you were to follow their 
desires after what has come to you of knowledge, you would 
have against allah no protector or helper.
                                               
33see footnote to 2:19.
34subhanahu means "far exalted is he above all they falsely attribute to him."

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
17
121. those to whom we have given the book recite it with its true 
recital.35  they [are the ones who] believe in it.  and whoever 
disbelieves in it – it is they who are the losers.
122. o children of israel, remember my favor which i have 
bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the worlds.
123. and fear a day when no soul will suffice for another soul36 at 
all, and no compensation will be accepted from it, nor will any 
intercession benefit it, nor will they be aided.
124. and [mention, o muhammad], when ibrahim was tried by 
his lord with words [i.e., commands] and he fulfilled them.  
[allah] said, "indeed, i will make you a leader for the people."  
[ibrahim] said, "and of my descendants?"  [allah] said, "my 
covenant does not include the wrongdoers."
125. and [mention] when we made the house [i.e., the kabah] a 
place of return for the people and [a place of] security.  and 
take, [o believers], from the standing place of ibrahim a 
place of prayer.  and we charged ibrahim and ishmael, 
[saying], "purify my house for those who perform tawaf37
and those who are staying [there] for worship and those who 
bow and prostrate [in prayer]."
126. and [mention] when ibrahim said, "my lord, make this a 
secure city and provide its people with fruits – whoever of 
them believes in allah and the last day."  [allah] said, "and 
whoever disbelieves – i will grant him enjoyment for a little; 
then i will force him to the punishment of the fire, and 
wretched is the destination."
127. and [mention] when ibrahim was raising the foundations of 
the house and [with him] ishmael, [saying], "our lord, accept
[this] from us.  indeed, you are the hearing, the knowing.
                                               
35i.e., applying its teachings to their lives.
36see footnote to 2:48.
37a form of worship particular to the kabah consisting of going around it in 
circuits.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
18
128. our lord, and make us muslims [in submission] to you and 
from our descendants a muslim nation [in submission] to you.  
and show us our rites [of hajj and umrah] and accept our 
repentance.  indeed, you are the accepting of repentance, the 
merciful.
129. our lord, and send among them a messenger from themselves
who will recite to them your verses and teach them the book 
and wisdom and purify them.  indeed, you are the exalted in 
might, the wise."
130. and who would be averse to the religion of ibrahim except 
one who makes a fool of himself.  and we had chosen him in 
this world, and indeed he, in the hereafter, will be among the 
righteous.
131. when his lord said to him, "submit," he said, "i have submitted
[in islam]38 to the lord of the worlds."
132. and ibrahim instructed his sons [to do the same] and [so did]
jacob, [saying], "o my sons, indeed allah has chosen for you 
this religion, so do not die except while you are muslims."
133. or were you witnesses when death approached jacob, when he 
said to his sons, "what will you worship after me?"  they said, 
"we will worship your god and the god of your fathers, 
ibrahim and ishmael and isaac – one god.39  and we are 
muslims [in submission] to him."
134. that was a nation which has passed on.  it will have [the 
consequence of] what it earned, and you will have what you 
have earned.  and you will not be asked about what they used 
to do.
135. they say, "be jews or christians [so] you will be guided."  
                                               
38the meaning of the word "islam" is "submission to the will of allah."  
this is the way of life ordained by allah and taught by all of the prophets 
from adam to muhammad ().  a muslim is one who submits himself to 
allah.
39allah (subhanahu wa taala) alone.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 1
19
say, "rather, [we follow] the religion of ibrahim, inclining 
toward truth, and he was not of the polytheists."40
136. say, [o believers], "we have believed in allah and what has 
been revealed to us and what has been revealed to ibrahim 
and ishmael and isaac and jacob and the descendants 
[al-asbat]41 and what was given to moses and jesus and what 
was given to the prophets from their lord.  we make no 
distinction between any of them, and we are muslims [in 
submission] to him."
137. so if they believe in the same as you believe in, then they 
have been [rightly] guided; but if they turn away, they are 
only in dissension, and allah will be sufficient for you against 
them.  and he is the hearing, the knowing.
138. [and say, "ours is] the religion of allah.  and who is better 
than allah in [ordaining] religion?  and we are worshippers 
of him."
139. say, [o muhammad], "do you argue with us about allah 
while he is our lord and your lord?  for us are our deeds, 
and for you are your deeds.  and we are sincere [in deed and 
intention] to him."
140. or do you say that ibrahim and ishmael and isaac and jacob 
and the descendants were jews or christians?  say, "are you 
more knowing or is allah?"  and who is more unjust than one 
who conceals a testimony42 he has from allah?  and allah is 
not unaware of what you do.
141. that is a nation which has passed on.  it will have [the 
consequence of] what it earned, and you will have what you 
have earned.  and you will not be asked about what they used 
to do.
                                               
40those who associate others with allah in worship.
41the twelve tribes of israel descended from jacob.
42statements in previous scriptures attesting to the nature of allah's religion 
(islam) and the coming of prophet muhammad ().

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
20
142. the foolish among the people will say, "what has turned them 
away from their qiblah,43 which they used to face?"44  say, 
"to allah belongs the east and the west.  he guides whom he 
wills to a straight path."
143. and thus we have made you a median [i.e., just] community 
that you will be witnesses over the people and the messenger 
will be a witness over you.  and we did not make the qiblah 
which you used to face except that we might make evident 
who would follow the messenger from who would turn back 
on his heels.  and indeed, it is difficult except for those whom 
allah has guided.  and never would allah have caused you to 
lose your faith [i.e., your previous prayers].  indeed allah is, 
to the people, kind and merciful.
144. we have certainly seen the turning of your face, [o 
muhammad], toward the heaven, and we will surely turn you 
to a qiblah with which you will be pleased.  so turn your face 
[i.e., yourself] toward al-masjid al-haram.45  and wherever 
you [believers] are, turn your faces [i.e., yourselves] toward it 
[in prayer].  indeed, those who have been given the scripture 
[i.e., the jews and the christians] well know that it is the truth 
from their lord.  and allah is not unaware of what they do.
145. and if you brought to those who were given the scripture 
every sign, they would not follow your qiblah.  nor will you 
be a follower of their qiblah.  nor would they be followers of 
one another's qiblah.  so if you were to follow their desires 
after what has come to you of knowledge, indeed, you would 
then be among the wrongdoers.
                                               
43the direction faced in prayer.
44prior to the command (in verse 144) that the prophet () and his 
followers turn toward the kabah in makkah for prayer, they had been 
facing jerusalem to the north.  the implications of this change are 
mentioned in succeeding verses.
45the sacred mosque in makkah containing the kabah.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
21
146. those to whom we gave the scripture know him [i.e., prophet 
muhammad ()] as they know their own sons.  but indeed, a 
party of them conceal the truth while they know [it].
147. the truth is from your lord, so never be among the doubters.
148. for each [religious following] is a [prayer] direction toward 
which it faces.  so race to [all that is] good.  wherever you 
may be, allah will bring you forth [for judgement] all together.  
indeed, allah is over all things competent.
149. so from wherever you go out [for prayer, o muhammad], 
turn your face toward al-masjid al-haram, and indeed, it is 
the truth from your lord.  and allah is not unaware of what 
you do.
150. and from wherever you go out [for prayer], turn your face 
toward al-masjid al-haram.  and wherever you [believers] may
be, turn your faces toward it in order that the people will not 
have any argument against you, except for those of them who 
commit wrong; so fear them not but fear me.  and [it is] so i 
may complete my favor upon you and that you may be guided,
151. just as we have sent among you a messenger from yourselves
reciting to you our verses and purifying you and teaching you 
the book and wisdom46 and teaching you that which you did 
not know.
152. so remember me; i will remember you.  and be grateful to 
me and do not deny me.
153. o you who have believed, seek help through patience and 
prayer.  indeed, allah is with the patient.
154. and do not say about those who are killed in the way of allah,
"they are dead."  rather, they are alive, but you perceive [it] not.
155. and we will surely test you with something of fear and hunger
and a loss of wealth and lives and fruits, but give good tidings 
to the patient,
                                               
46the wisdom taught by the prophet () is his sunnah.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
22
156. who, when disaster strikes them, say, "indeed we belong to 
allah, and indeed to him we will return."
157. those are the ones upon whom are blessings from their lord 
and mercy.  and it is those who are the [rightly] guided.
158. indeed, a§-safa and al-marwah are among the symbols47 of 
allah.  so whoever makes hajj [pilgrimage] to the house or 
performs umrah – there is no blame upon him for walking 
between them.48  and whoever volunteers good – then indeed,
allah is appreciative and knowing.
159. indeed, those who conceal what we sent down of clear proofs
and guidance after we made it clear for the people in the 
scripture – those are cursed by allah and cursed by those who 
curse,49
160. except for those who repent and correct themselves and make
evident [what they concealed].  those – i will accept their 
repentance, and i am the accepting of repentance, the merciful.
161. indeed, those who disbelieve and die while they are 
disbelievers – upon them will be the curse of allah and of the 
angels and the people, all together,
162. abiding eternally therein.  the punishment will not be lightened 
for them, nor will they be reprieved.
163. and your god is one god.  there is no deity [worthy of worship] 
except him, the entirely merciful, the especially merciful.
164. indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the 
alternation of the night and the day, and the [great] ships 
which sail through the sea with that which benefits people, 
and what allah has sent down from the heavens of rain, 
giving life thereby to the earth after its lifelessness and 
dispersing therein every [kind of] moving creature, and [his] 
                                               
47places designated for the rites of hajj and umrah.
48some believers had previously feared that this might be a pagan practice, 
so allah confirms that sai is among the rites of his religion.
49from among the angels and the believers.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
23
directing of the winds and the clouds controlled between the 
heaven and earth are signs for a people who use reason.
165. and [yet], among the people are those who take other than 
allah as equals [to him].  they love them as they [should] 
love allah.  but those who believe are stronger in love for allah.  
and if only they who have wronged would consider [that] when
they see the punishment, [they will be certain] that all power 
belongs to allah and that allah is severe in punishment.
166. [and they should consider that] when those who have been 
followed disassociate themselves from those who followed 
[them], and they [all] see the punishment, and cut off from 
them are the ties [of relationship],
167. those who followed will say, "if only we had another turn [at 
worldly life] so we could disassociate ourselves from them as 
they have disassociated themselves from us."  thus will allah
show them their deeds as regrets upon them.  and they are 
never to emerge from the fire.
168. o mankind, eat from whatever is on earth [that is] lawful and 
good and do not follow the footsteps of satan.  indeed, he is to 
you a clear enemy.
169. he only orders you to evil and immorality and to say about 
allah what you do not know.
170. and when it is said to them, "follow what allah has revealed,"
they say, "rather, we will follow that which we found our
fathers doing."  even though their fathers understood nothing,
nor were they guided?
171. the example of those who disbelieve is like that of one who 
shouts at what hears nothing but calls and cries [i.e., cattle or 
sheep] – deaf, dumb and blind, so they do not understand.
172. o you who have believed, eat from the good [i.e., lawful] 
things which we have provided for you and be grateful to 
allah if it is [indeed] him that you worship.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
24
173. he has only forbidden to you dead animals,50 blood, the flesh 
of swine, and that which has been dedicated to other than 
allah.  but whoever is forced [by necessity], neither desiring 
[it] nor transgressing [its limit], there is no sin upon him.  
indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
174. indeed, they who conceal what allah has sent down of the 
book and exchange it for a small price – those consume not 
into their bellies except the fire.  and allah will not speak to 
them on the day of resurrection, nor will he purify them.  
and they will have a painful punishment.
175. those are the ones who have exchanged guidance for error 
and forgiveness for punishment.  how patient they are for 
[i.e., in pursuit of] the fire!
176. that is [deserved by them] because allah has sent down the 
book in truth.  and indeed, those who differ over the book 
are in extreme dissension.
177. righteousness is not that you turn your faces toward the east 
or the west, but [true] righteousness is [in] one who believes 
in allah, the last day, the angels, the book, and the prophets 
and gives wealth, in spite of love for it, to relatives, orphans, 
the needy, the traveler, those who ask [for help], and for 
freeing slaves; [and who] establishes prayer and gives zakah; 
[those who] fulfill their promise when they promise; and 
[those who] are patient in poverty and hardship and during 
battle.  those are the ones who have been true, and it is those 
who are the righteous.
178. o you who have believed, prescribed for you is legal retribution
for those murdered – the free for the free, the slave for the slave, 
and the female for the female.51  but whoever overlooks from 
his brother [i.e., the killer] anything,52 then there should be a 
suitable follow-up and payment to him [i.e., the deceased's 
                                               
50those not slaughtered or hunted expressly for food.
51no one else should be executed in place of the killer.
52by accepting compensation payment rather than execution.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
25
heir or legal representative] with good conduct.  this is an 
alleviation from your lord and a mercy.  but whoever 
transgresses after that53 will have a painful punishment.
179. and there is for you in legal retribution [saving of] life, o you
[people] of understanding, that you may become righteous.
180. prescribed for you when death approaches [any] one of you if 
he leaves wealth [is that he should make] a bequest for the 
parents and near relatives according to what is acceptable – a 
duty upon the righteous.54
181. then whoever alters it [i.e., the bequest] after he has heard it –
the sin is only upon those who have altered it.  indeed, allah 
is hearing and knowing.
182. but if one fears from the bequeather [some] error or sin and 
corrects that which is between them [i.e., the concerned parties],
there is no sin upon him.  indeed, allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
183. o you who have believed, decreed upon you is fasting as it 
was decreed upon those before you that you may become 
righteous –
184. [fasting for] a limited number of days.  so whoever among 
you is ill or on a journey [during them] – then an equal 
number of days [are to be made up].  and upon those who are 
able [to fast, but with hardship] – a ransom [as substitute] of 
feeding a poor person [each day].  and whoever volunteers
good [i.e., excess] – it is better for him.  but to fast is best for 
you, if you only knew.
185. the month of ramadhan [is that] in which was revealed the 
quran, a guidance for the people and clear proofs of guidance
and criterion.  so whoever sights [the new moon of] the month,55
                                               
53after acceptance of compensation.
54this ruling was abrogated by the revelation in surah an-nisa stipulating 
obligatory shares for parents and close relatives.  those who do not inherit 
by law may be remembered in a bequest.  see 4:11-12.
55also, "whoever is present during the month."

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
26
let him fast it; and whoever is ill or on a journey – then an 
equal number of other days.  allah intends for you ease and 
does not intend for you hardship and [wants] for you to 
complete the period and to glorify allah for that [to] which he 
has guided you; and perhaps you will be grateful.
186. and when my servants ask you, [o muhammad], concerning 
me – indeed i am near.  i respond to the invocation of the 
supplicant when he calls upon me. so let them respond to me 
[by obedience] and believe in me that they may be [rightly] 
guided.
187. it has been made permissible for you the night preceding 
fasting to go to your wives [for sexual relations].  they are 
clothing for you and you are clothing for them.  allah knows 
that you used to deceive yourselves,56 so he accepted your 
repentance and forgave you.  so now, have relations with 
them and seek that which allah has decreed for you [i.e., 
offspring].  and eat and drink until the white thread of dawn 
becomes distinct to you from the black thread [of night].  
then complete the fast until the night [i.e., sunset].  and do 
not have relations with them as long as you are staying for 
worship in the mosques.  these are the limits [set by] allah, 
so do not approach them.  thus does allah make clear his 
verses [i.e., ordinances] to the people that they may become 
righteous.
188. and do not consume one another's wealth unjustly or send it 
[in bribery] to the rulers in order that [they might aid] you 
[to] consume a portion of the wealth of the people in sin, 
while you know [it is unlawful].
189. they ask you, [o muhammad], about the new moons.  say, 
"they are measurements of time for the people and for hajj 
[pilgrimage]."  and it is not righteousness to enter houses 
                                               
56prior to this revelation, marital relations were unlawful during nights 
preceding fasting.  some were unable to refrain and secretly disobeyed, 
but they did not deceive allah.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
27
from the back, but righteousness is [in] one who fears allah.  
and enter houses from their doors.  and fear allah that you 
may succeed.
190. fight in the way of allah those who fight you but do not 
transgress.  indeed, allah does not like transgressors.
191. and kill them wherever you overtake them and expel them 
from wherever they have expelled you, and fitnah57 is worse 
than killing.  and do not fight them at al-masjid al-haram 
until they fight you there.  but if they fight you, then kill them.  
such is the recompense of the disbelievers.
192. and if they cease, then indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
193. fight them until there is no [more] fitnah58 and [until] religion
[i.e., worship] is [acknowledged to be] for allah.  but if they 
cease, then there is to be no aggression [i.e., assault] except 
against the oppressors.
194. [fighting in] the sacred month is for [aggression committed in]
the sacred month,59 and for [all] violations is legal retribution.  
so whoever has assaulted you, then assault him in the same 
way that he has assaulted you.  and fear allah and know that 
allah is with those who fear him.
195. and spend in the way of allah and do not throw [yourselves] 
with your [own] hands into destruction [by refraining].  and 
do good; indeed, allah loves the doers of good.
196. and complete the hajj and umrah for allah.  but if you are 
prevented, then [offer] what can be obtained with ease of 
sacrificial animals.  and do not shave your heads until the 
sacrificial animal has reached its place of slaughter.  and 
whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the head 
[making shaving necessary must offer] a ransom of fasting 
                                               
57disbelief and its imposition on others.
58among the meanings of fitnah are disbelief, discord, dissension, civil 
strife, persecution, oppression, injustice, seduction, trial and torment.
59the sacred months are dhul-qadah, dhul-hijjah, muharram and rajab.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
28
[three days] or charity60 or sacrifice.61  and when you are 
secure,62 then whoever performs umrah [during the hajj 
months]63 followed by hajj [offers] what can be obtained with 
ease of sacrificial animals.  and whoever cannot find [or 
afford such an animal] – then a fast of three days during hajj 
and of seven when you have returned [home].  those are ten 
complete [days].  this is for those whose family is not in the 
area of al-masjid al-haram.  and fear allah and know that 
allah is severe in penalty.
197. hajj is [during] well-known months,64 so whoever has made 
hajj obligatory upon himself therein [by entering the state of 
ihram], there is [to be for him] no sexual relations and no 
disobedience and no disputing during hajj.  and whatever 
good you do – allah knows it.  and take provisions, but indeed,
the best provision is fear of allah.  and fear me, o you of 
understanding.
198. there is no blame upon you for seeking bounty65 from your 
lord [during hajj].  but when you depart from arafat, remember
allah at al-mashar al-haram.66  and remember him, as he 
has guided you, for indeed, you were before that among those 
astray.
199. then depart from the place from where [all] the people depart 
and ask forgiveness of allah.  indeed, allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
200. and when you have completed your rites, remember allah 
like your [previous] remembrance of your fathers or with 
[much] greater remembrance.  and among the people is he 
                                               
60feeding six needy persons.
61the slaughter of a sheep or goat.
62under normal conditions, i.e., are not prevented.
63the months of shawwal, dhul-qadah and dhul-hijjah.
64see previous footnote.
65i.e., profit from trade or business.
66which is in muzdalifah.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
29
who says, "our lord, give us in this world," and he will have 
in the hereafter no share.
201. but among them is he who says, "our lord, give us in this 
world [that which is] good and in the hereafter [that which is]
good and protect us from the punishment of the fire."
202. those will have a share of what they have earned, and allah is 
swift in account.
203. and remember allah during [specific] numbered days.  then 
whoever hastens [his departure] in two days – there is no sin 
upon him; and whoever delays [until the third] – there is no 
sin upon him – for him who fears allah.  and fear allah and 
know that unto him you will be gathered.
204. and of the people is he whose speech pleases you in worldly 
life, and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart, yet 
he is the fiercest of opponents.
205. and when he goes away, he strives throughout the land to cause
corruption therein and destroy crops and animals.  and allah 
does not like corruption.
206. and when it is said to him, "fear allah," pride in the sin takes
hold of him.  sufficient for him is hellfire, and how wretched 
is the resting place.
207. and of the people is he who sells himself, seeking means to 
the approval of allah.  and allah is kind to [his] servants.
208. o you who have believed, enter into islam completely [and 
perfectly] and do not follow the footsteps of satan.  indeed, he 
is to you a clear enemy.
209. but if you slip [i.e., deviate] after clear proofs have come to 
you, then know that allah is exalted in might and wise.
210. do they await but that allah should come to them in covers of 
clouds and the angels [as well] and the matter is [then] decided?  
and to allah [all] matters are returned.
211. ask the children of israel how many a sign of evidence we 
have given them.  and whoever exchanges the favor of allah 

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
30
[for disbelief] after it has come to him – then indeed, allah is 
severe in penalty.
212. beautified for those who disbelieve is the life of this world, 
and they ridicule those who believe.  but those who fear allah
are above them on the day of resurrection.  and allah gives 
provision to whom he wills without account.
213. mankind was [of] one religion [before their deviation]; then 
allah sent the prophets as bringers of good tidings and warners 
and sent down with them the scripture in truth to judge 
between the people concerning that in which they differed.  
and none differed over it [i.e., the scripture] except those 
who were given it – after the clear proofs came to them – out 
of jealous animosity among themselves.  and allah guided
those who believed to the truth concerning that over which they
had differed, by his permission.  and allah guides whom he 
wills to a straight path.
214. or do you think that you will enter paradise while such [trial] 
has not yet come to you as came to those who passed on 
before you?  they were touched by poverty and hardship and 
were shaken until [even their] messenger and those who 
believed with him said, "when is the help of allah?"  
unquestionably, the help of allah is near.
215. they ask you, [o muhammad], what they should spend.  say, 
"whatever you spend of good is [to be] for parents and 
relatives and orphans and the needy and the traveler.  and 
whatever you do of good – indeed, allah is knowing of it."
216. fighting has been enjoined upon you while it is hateful to you.  
but perhaps you hate a thing and it is good for you; and 
perhaps you love a thing and it is bad for you.  and allah 
knows, while you know not.
217. they ask you about the sacred month67 – about fighting 
therein.  say, "fighting therein is great [sin], but averting 
                                               
67see footnote to 2:194.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
31
[people] from the way of allah and disbelief in him and 
[preventing access to] al-masjid al-haram and the expulsion 
of its people therefrom are greater [evil] in the sight of allah.  
and fitnah68 is greater than killing."  and they will continue to 
fight you until they turn you back from your religion if they 
are able.  and whoever of you reverts from his religion [to 
disbelief] and dies while he is a disbeliever – for those, their 
deeds have become worthless in this world and the hereafter, 
and those are the companions of the fire; they will abide 
therein eternally.
218. indeed, those who have believed and those who have emigrated
and fought in the cause of allah – those expect the mercy of 
allah.  and allah is forgiving and merciful.
219. they ask you about wine69 and gambling.  say, "in them is 
great sin and [yet, some] benefit for people.  but their sin is 
greater than their benefit."  and they ask you what they should
spend.  say, "the excess [beyond needs]."  thus allah makes 
clear to you the verses [of revelation] that you might give thought
220. to this world and the hereafter.  and they ask you about 
orphans.  say, "improvement for them is best.  and if you mix
your affairs with theirs – they are your brothers.  and allah
knows the corrupter from the amender.  and if allah had willed, 
he could have put you in difficulty.  indeed, allah is exalted 
in might and wise."
221. and do not marry polytheistic women until they believe.70  
and a believing slave woman is better than a polytheist, even 
though she might please you.  and do not marry polytheistic 
men [to your women] until they believe.  and a believing slave
is better than a polytheist, even though he might please you.  
those invite [you] to the fire, but allah invites to paradise 
and to forgiveness, by his permission.  and he makes clear 
                                               
68see footnote to 2:193.
69the word "khamr" (wine) includes all intoxicants.  the final prohibition is 
given in 5:90-91.
70i.e., worship and obey allah alone.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
32
his verses [i.e., ordinances] to the people that perhaps they 
may remember.
222. and they ask you about menstruation.  say, "it is harm, so 
keep away from wives71 during menstruation.  and do not 
approach them until they are pure.  and when they have 
purified themselves,72 then come to them from where allah 
has ordained for you.  indeed, allah loves those who are 
constantly repentant and loves those who purify themselves."
223. your wives are a place of cultivation [i.e., sowing of seed] for 
you, so come to your place of cultivation however you wish 
and put forth [righteousness] for yourselves.  and fear allah 
and know that you will meet him.  and give good tidings to 
the believers.
224. and do not make [your oath by] allah an excuse against being 
righteous and fearing allah and making peace among people.  
and allah is hearing and knowing.
225. allah does not impose blame upon you for what is unintentional 
in your oaths, but he imposes blame upon you for what your 
hearts have earned.  and allah is forgiving and forbearing.
226. for those who swear not to have sexual relations with their 
wives73 is a waiting time of four months, but if they return [to 
normal relations] – then indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
227. and if they decide on divorce – then indeed, allah is hearing 
and knowing.
228. divorced women remain in waiting [i.e., do not remarry] for 
three periods,74 and it is not lawful for them to conceal what 
allah has created in their wombs if they believe in allah and
                                               
71i.e., refrain from sexual intercourse.
72by taking a complete bath (ghusl).
73without divorcing them.  by such an oath the woman is deprived of her 
right in marriage but is not free to marry another.  she may not be kept in 
such a condition beyond the four-month limit.
74either menstrual periods or periods of purity between menstruation.  see 
also 65:1-7.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
33
the last day.  and their husbands have more right to take 
them back in this [period] if they want reconciliation.75  and 
due to them [i.e., the wives] is similar to what is expected of 
them, according to what is reasonable.76  but the men [i.e., 
husbands] have a degree over them [in responsibility and 
authority].  and allah is exalted in might and wise.
229. divorce is twice.  then [after that], either keep [her] in an 
acceptable manner or release [her] with good treatment.  and 
it is not lawful for you to take anything of what you have 
given them unless both fear that they will not be able to keep 
[within] the limits of allah.77  but if you fear that they will not 
keep [within] the limits of allah, then there is no blame upon 
either of them concerning that by which she ransoms herself.  
these are the limits of allah, so do not transgress them.  and 
whoever transgresses the limits of allah – it is those who are 
the wrongdoers [i.e., the unjust].
230. and if he has divorced her [for the third time], then she is not 
lawful to him afterward until [after] she marries a husband 
other than him.78  and if he [i.e., the latter husband] divorces 
her [or dies], there is no blame upon them [i.e., the woman 
and her former husband] for returning to each other if they 
think that they can keep [within] the limits of allah.  these 
are the limits of allah, which he makes clear to a people who 
know [i.e., understand].
231. and when you divorce women and they have [nearly] fulfilled
their term, either retain them according to acceptable terms or 
release them according to acceptable terms, and do not keep 
them, intending harm, to transgress [against them].  and whoever
                                               
75the husband may return her to himself during the iddah period of a first 
and second divorce without a new marriage contract.
76the wife has specific rights upon her husband, just as the husband has 
rights upon her.
77i.e., deal fairly with each other.
78with the intention of permanence, not merely in order to return to the 
previous husband.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
34
does that has certainly wronged himself.  and do not take the 
verses of allah in jest.  and remember the favor of allah 
upon you and what has been revealed to you of the book [i.e., 
the quran] and wisdom [i.e., the prophet's sunnah] by which 
he instructs you.  and fear allah and know that allah is 
knowing of all things.
232. and when you divorce women79 and they have fulfilled their 
term, do not prevent them from remarrying their [former] 
husbands if they [i.e., all parties] agree among themselves on an
acceptable basis.  that is instructed to whoever of you believes
in allah and the last day.  that is better for you and purer, 
and allah knows and you know not.
233. mothers may nurse [i.e., breastfeed] their children two complete
years for whoever wishes to complete the nursing [period].  
upon the father is their [i.e., the mothers'] provision and their 
clothing according to what is acceptable.  no person is charged
with more than his capacity.  no mother should be harmed 
through her child, and no father through his child.  and upon 
the [father's] heir is [a duty] like that [of the father].  and if 
they both desire weaning through mutual consent from both of
them and consultation, there is no blame upon either of them.  
and if you wish to have your children nursed by a substitute, 
there is no blame upon you as long as you give payment 
according to what is acceptable.  and fear allah and know 
that allah is seeing of what you do.
234. and those who are taken in death among you and leave wives 
behind – they, [the wives, shall] wait four months and ten 
[days].  and when they have fulfilled their term, then there is 
no blame upon you for what they do with themselves in an 
acceptable manner.80  and allah is [fully] acquainted with 
what you do.
                                               
79for the first or second time.
80they may remarry if they wish.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
35
235. there is no blame upon you for that to which you [indirectly] 
allude concerning a proposal to women or for what you 
conceal within yourselves.  allah knows that you will have 
them in mind.  but do not promise them secretly except for 
saying a proper saying.  and do not determine to undertake a 
marriage contract until the decreed period81 reaches its end.  
and know that allah knows what is within yourselves, so beware 
of him.  and know that allah is forgiving and forbearing.
236. there is no blame upon you if you divorce women you have 
not touched82 nor specified for them an obligation.83  but give 
them [a gift of] compensation – the wealthy according to his 
capability and the poor according to his capability – a provision
according to what is acceptable, a duty upon the doers of good.
237. and if you divorce them before you have touched them and 
you have already specified for them an obligation, then [give] 
half of what you specified – unless they forego the right or the 
one in whose hand is the marriage contract foregoes it.  and 
to forego it is nearer to righteousness.  and do not forget 
graciousness between you.  indeed allah, of whatever you do,
is seeing.
238. maintain with care the [obligatory] prayers and [in particular] 
the middle [i.e., asr] prayer and stand before allah, devoutly 
obedient.
239. and if you fear [an enemy, then pray] on foot or riding.  but 
when you are secure, then remember allah [in prayer], as he 
has taught you that which you did not [previously] know.
240. and those who are taken in death among you and leave wives 
behind – for their wives is a bequest:  maintenance for one 
year without turning [them] out.  but if they leave [of their 
own accord], then there is no blame upon you for what they 
                                               
81the iddah (bereavement period) after the death of a husband.
82the marriage has not been consummated.
83required bridal gift (mahr).

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 2
36
do with themselves in an acceptable way.84  and allah is 
exalted in might and wise.
241. and for divorced women is a provision according to what is 
acceptable – a duty upon the righteous.
242. thus does allah make clear to you his verses [i.e., laws] that 
you might use reason.
243. have you not considered those who left their homes in many 
thousands, fearing death?  allah said to them, "die"; then he 
restored them to life.  and allah is full of bounty to the people,
but most of the people do not show gratitude.
244. and fight in the cause of allah and know that allah is 
hearing and knowing.
245. who is it that would loan allah a goodly loan so he may 
multiply it for him many times over?  and it is allah who 
withholds and grants abundance, and to him you will be 
returned.
246. have you not considered the assembly of the children of israel
after [the time of] moses when they said to a prophet of theirs,
"send to us a king, and we will fight in the way of allah"?  he 
said, "would you perhaps refrain from fighting if fighting was 
prescribed for you?"  they said, "and why should we not 
fight in the cause of allah when we have been driven out from 
our homes and from our children?"  but when fighting was 
prescribed for them, they turned away, except for a few of them.  
and allah is knowing of the wrongdoers.
247. and their prophet said to them, "indeed, allah has sent to you 
saul as a king."  they said, "how can he have kingship over 
us while we are more worthy of kingship than him and he has 
not been given any measure of wealth?"  he said, "indeed, 
allah has chosen him over you and has increased him 
abundantly in knowledge and stature.  and allah gives his
sovereignty to whom he wills.  and allah is all-encompassing
[in favor] and knowing."
                                               
84this directive was abrogated by those later revealed in 2:234 and 4:12.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
37
248. and their prophet said to them, "indeed, a sign of his kingship
is that the chest will come to you in which is assurance85 from 
your lord and a remnant of what the family of moses and the 
family of aaron had left, carried by the angels.  indeed in that 
is a sign for you, if you are believers."
249. and when saul went forth with the soldiers, he said, "indeed, 
allah will be testing you with a river.  so whoever drinks from
it is not of me, and whoever does not taste it is indeed of me, 
excepting one who takes [from it] in the hollow of his hand."  
but they drank from it, except a [very] few of them.  then when
he had crossed it along with those who believed with him, 
they said, "there is no power for us today against goliath and
his soldiers."  but those who were certain that they would 
meet allah said, "how many a small company has overcome 
a large company by permission of allah.  and allah is with 
the patient."
250. and when they went forth to [face] goliath and his soldiers, 
they said, "our lord, pour upon us patience and plant firmly 
our feet and give us victory over the disbelieving people."
251. so they defeated them by permission of allah, and david 
killed goliath, and allah gave him the kingship and wisdom 
[i.e., prophethood] and taught him from that which he willed.  
and if it were not for allah checking [some] people by means
of others, the earth would have been corrupted, but allah is 
full of bounty to the worlds.
252. these are the verses of allah which we recite to you, [o 
muhammad], in truth.  and indeed, you are from among the 
messengers.
253. those messengers – some of them we caused to exceed others.  
among them were those to whom allah spoke, and he raised 
some of them in degree.  and we gave jesus, the son of mary,
clear proofs, and we supported him with the pure spirit [i.e., 
                                               
85signs giving reassurance.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
38
gabriel].  if allah had willed, those [generations] succeeding 
them would not have fought each other after the clear proofs 
had come to them.  but they differed, and some of them believed
and some of them disbelieved.  and if allah had willed, they 
would not have fought each other, but allah does what he 
intends.
254. o you who have believed, spend from that which we have 
provided for you before there comes a day in which there is 
no exchange [i.e., ransom] and no friendship and no intercession.  
and the disbelievers – they are the wrongdoers.
255. allah – there is no deity except him, the ever-living, the 
sustainer of [all] existence.  neither drowsiness overtakes 
him nor sleep.  to him belongs whatever is in the heavens 
and whatever is on the earth.  who is it that can intercede 
with him except by his permission?  he knows what is 
[presently] before them and what will be after them,86 and 
they encompass not a thing of his knowledge except for what 
he wills.  his kursi87 extends over the heavens and the earth, 
and their preservation tires him not.  and he is the most high,
the most great.
256. there shall be no compulsion in [acceptance of] the religion.  
the right course has become clear from the wrong.  so 
whoever disbelieves in taghut88 and believes in allah has 
grasped the most trustworthy handhold with no break in it.  
and allah is hearing and knowing.
257. allah is the ally89 of those who believe.  he brings them out 
from darknesses into the light.  and those who disbelieve –
their allies are taghut.  they take them out of the light into 
                                               
86allah's knowledge encompasses every aspect of his creations in the past, 
present and future.
87chair or footstool.  it is not to be confused with al-arsh (the throne), 
which is infinitely higher and greater than al-kursi.
88false objects of worship, such as idols, heavenly bodies, spirits, human 
beings, etc.
89i.e., patron and supporter.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
39
darknesses.90  those are the companions of the fire; they will 
abide eternally therein.
258. have you not considered the one who argued with ibrahim 
about his lord [merely] because allah had given him kingship?  
when ibrahim said, "my lord is the one who gives life and 
causes death," he said, "i give life and cause death."  ibrahim
said, "indeed, allah brings up the sun from the east, so bring 
it up from the west."  so the disbeliever was overwhelmed 
[by astonishment], and allah does not guide the wrongdoing 
people.
259. or [consider such an example] as the one who passed by a 
township which had fallen into ruin.  he said, "how will 
allah bring this to life after its death?"  so allah caused him 
to die for a hundred years; then he revived him.  he said, 
"how long have you remained?"  he [the man] said, "i have 
remained a day or part of a day."  he said, "rather, you have 
remained one hundred years.  look at your food and your drink;
it has not changed with time.  and look at your donkey; and 
we will make you a sign for the people.  and look at the bones
[of this donkey] – how we raise them and then we cover 
them with flesh."  and when it became clear to him, he said, 
"i know that allah is over all things competent."
260. and [mention] when ibrahim said, "my lord, show me how 
you give life to the dead."  [allah] said, "have you not 
believed?"  he said, "yes, but [i ask] only that my heart may 
be satisfied."  [allah] said, "take four birds and commit them
to yourself.91  then [after slaughtering them] put on each hill a
portion of them; then call them – they will come [flying] to you
in haste.  and know that allah is exalted in might and wise."
261. the example of those who spend their wealth in the way of 
allah is like a seed [of grain] which grows seven spikes; in 
                                               
90the light of truth is one, while the darknesses of disbelief, doubt and error 
are many.
91i.e., train them to come to you on command.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
40
each spike is a hundred grains.  and allah multiplies [his 
reward] for whom he wills.  and allah is all-encompassing 
and knowing.
262. those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then 
do not follow up what they have spent with reminders [of it] 
or [other] injury will have their reward with their lord, and 
there will be no fear concerning them, nor will they grieve.
263. kind speech and forgiveness are better than charity followed 
by injury.  and allah is free of need and forbearing.
264. o you who have believed, do not invalidate your charities 
with reminders [of it] or injury as does one who spends his 
wealth [only] to be seen by the people and does not believe in 
allah and the last day.  his example is like that of a [large] 
smooth stone upon which is dust and is hit by a downpour 
that leaves it bare.  they are unable [to keep] anything of what
they have earned.  and allah does not guide the disbelieving 
people.
265. and the example of those who spend their wealth seeking 
means to the approval of allah and assuring [reward for] 
themselves is like a garden on high ground which is hit by a 
downpour – so it yields its fruits in double.  and [even] if it 
is not hit by a downpour, then a drizzle [is sufficient].  and 
allah, of what you do, is seeing.
266. would one of you like to have a garden of palm trees and 
grapevines underneath which rivers flow in which he has from 
every fruit? but he is afflicted with old age and has weak [i.e.,
immature] offspring, and it is hit by a whirlwind containing 
fire and is burned.  thus does allah make clear to you [his] 
verses that you might give thought.
267. o you who have believed, spend from the good things which 
you have earned and from that which we have produced for 
you from the earth.  and do not aim toward the defective 
therefrom, spending [from that] while you would not take it 
[yourself] except with closed eyes.  and know that allah is 
free of need and praiseworthy.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
41
268. satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality,
while allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty.  
and allah is all-encompassing and knowing.
269. he gives wisdom92 to whom he wills, and whoever has been 
given wisdom has certainly been given much good.  and none
will remember except those of understanding.
270. and whatever you spend of expenditures or make of vows –
indeed, allah knows of it.  and for the wrongdoers there are 
no helpers.
271. if you disclose your charitable expenditures, they are good; 
but if you conceal them and give them to the poor, it is better 
for you, and he will remove from you some of your misdeeds
[thereby].  and allah, with what you do, is [fully] acquainted.
272. not upon you, [o muhammad], is [responsibility for] their 
guidance, but allah guides whom he wills.  and whatever good
you [believers] spend is for yourselves, and you do not spend 
except seeking the countenance of allah.  and whatever you 
spend of good93 – it will be fully repaid to you, and you will 
not be wronged.
273. [charity is] for the poor who have been restricted for the cause
of allah, unable to move about in the land.  an ignorant [person]
would think them self-sufficient because of their restraint, but 
you will know them by their [characteristic] sign.  they do 
not ask people persistently [or at all].  and whatever you 
spend of good – indeed, allah is knowing of it.
274. those who spend their wealth [in allah's way] by night and 
by day, secretly and publicly – they will have their reward 
with their lord.  and no fear will there be concerning them, 
nor will they grieve.
275. those who consume interest94 cannot stand [on the day of 
                                               
92the knowledge and understanding of the religion and of the quran.
93i.e., wealth, property, resources, time, effort, etc.
94included is that given on commercial as well as consumer loans.

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
42
resurrection] except as one stands who is being beaten by 
satan into insanity.  that is because they say, "trade is [just] 
like interest."  but allah has permitted trade and has forbidden
interest.  so whoever has received an admonition from his 
lord and desists may have what is past, and his affair rests 
with allah.  but whoever returns [to dealing in interest or 
usury] – those are the companions of the fire; they will abide 
eternally therein.
276. allah destroys interest and gives increase for charities.  and 
allah does not like every sinning disbeliever.
277. indeed, those who believe and do righteous deeds and establish
prayer and give zakah will have their reward with their lord, 
and there will be no fear concerning them, nor will they grieve.
278. o you who have believed, fear allah and give up what remains
[due to you] of interest, if you should be believers.
279. and if you do not, then be informed of a war [against you] from 
allah and his messenger.  but if you repent, you may have 
your principal – [thus] you do no wrong, nor are you wronged.
280. and if someone is in hardship, then [let there be] postponement
until [a time of] ease.  but if you give [from your right as] charity,
then it is better for you, if you only knew.
281. and fear a day when you will be returned to allah.  then 
every soul will be compensated for what it earned, and they 
will not be wronged [i.e., treated unjustly].
282. o you who have believed, when you contract a debt for a 
specified term, write it down.  and let a scribe write [it] 
between you in justice.  let no scribe refuse to write as allah 
has taught him.  so let him write and let the one who has the 
obligation [i.e., the debtor] dictate.  and let him fear allah, 
his lord, and not leave anything out of it.  but if the one who 
has the obligation is of limited understanding or weak or unable
to dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate in justice.  and 
bring to witness two witnesses from among your men.  and if 
there are not two men [available], then a man and two women 

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
43
from those whom you accept as witnesses – so that if one of 
them [i.e., the women] errs, then the other can remind her.  
and let not the witnesses refuse when they are called upon.  
and do not be [too] weary to write it, whether it is small or 
large, for its [specified] term.  that is more just in the sight of 
allah and stronger as evidence and more likely to prevent 
doubt between you, except when it is an immediate transaction
which you conduct among yourselves.  for [then] there is no 
blame upon you if you do not write it.  and take witnesses 
when you conclude a contract.  let no scribe be harmed or any
witness.  for if you do so, indeed, it is [grave] disobedience in 
you.  and fear allah.  and allah teaches you.  and allah is 
knowing of all things.
283. and if you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then a 
security deposit [should be] taken.  and if one of you entrusts 
another, then let him who is entrusted discharge his trust 
[faithfully] and let him fear allah, his lord.  and do not 
conceal testimony, for whoever conceals it – his heart is 
indeed sinful, and allah is knowing of what you do.
284. to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is 
in the earth.  whether you show what is within yourselves or 
conceal it, allah will bring you to account for it.  then he 
will forgive whom he wills and punish whom he wills, and 
allah is over all things competent.
285. the messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from 
his lord, and [so have] the believers.  all of them have 
believed in allah and his angels and his books and his 
messengers, [saying], "we make no distinction between any 
of his messengers."  and they say, "we hear and we obey.  
[we seek] your forgiveness, our lord, and to you is the [final]
destination."
286. allah does not charge a soul except [with that within] its 
capacity.  it will have [the consequence of] what [good] it has 
gained, and it will bear [the consequence of] what [evil] it has 
earned.  "our lord, do not impose blame upon us if we have 

surah 2 – al-baqarah
juz 3
44
forgotten or erred.  our lord, and lay not upon us a burden 
like that which you laid upon those before us. our lord, and 
burden us not with that which we have no ability to bear.  and 
pardon us; and forgive us; and have mercy upon us.  you are 
our protector, so give us victory over the disbelieving people."95
                                               
95allah (subhanahu wa taala) concludes this surah by directing his servants
how to supplicate him, just as he taught them in surah al-fatihah how to 
praise him and ask for guidance.


juz 3
45

96
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, meem.97
2. allah – there is no deity except him, the ever-living, the 
sustainer of existence.
3. he has sent down upon you, [o muhammad], the book in truth, 
confirming what was before it.  and he revealed the torah and 
the gospel
4. before, as guidance for the people.  and he revealed the criterion
[i.e., the quran].  indeed, those who disbelieve in the verses of 
allah will have a severe punishment, and allah is exalted in might,
the owner of retribution.
5. indeed, from allah nothing is hidden in the earth nor in the heaven.
6. it is he who forms you in the wombs however he wills.  there 
is no deity except him, the exalted in might, the wise.
7. it is he who has sent down to you, [o muhammad], the book; 
in it are verses [that are] precise – they are the foundation of the 
book – and others unspecific.98  as for those in whose hearts is 
deviation [from truth], they will follow that of it which is unspecific,
seeking discord and seeking an interpretation [suitable to them].  
and no one knows its [true] interpretation except allah.  but those
firm in knowledge say, "we believe in it.  all [of it] is from our 
lord."  and no one will be reminded except those of understanding,
8. [who say], "our lord, let not our hearts deviate after you have 
guided us and grant us from yourself mercy.  indeed, you are 
the bestower.
                                               
96ali imran:  the family of imran.
97see footnote to 2:1.
98those which are stated in such a way that they are open to more than one 
interpretation or whose meaning is known only to allah, such as the 
opening letters of certain surahs.


juz 3
46
9.
our lord, surely you will gather the people for a day about which
there is no doubt.  indeed, allah does not fail in his promise."
10.
indeed, those who disbelieve – never will their wealth or their 
children avail them against allah at all.  and it is they who 
are fuel for the fire.
11.
[theirs is] like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those 
before them.  they denied our signs, so allah seized them for 
their sins.  and allah is severe in penalty.
12.
say to those who disbelieve, "you will be overcome and gathered
together to hell, and wretched is the resting place."
13.
already there has been for you a sign in the two armies which 
met [in combat at badr] – one fighting in the cause of allah 
and another of disbelievers.  they saw them [to be] twice their 
[own] number by [their] eyesight.99  but allah supports with 
his victory whom he wills.  indeed in that is a lesson for 
those of vision.
14.
beautified for people is the love of that which they desire – of 
women and sons, heaped-up sums of gold and silver, fine 
branded horses, and cattle and tilled land.  that is the 
enjoyment of worldly life, but allah has with him the best 
return [i.e., paradise].
15.
say, "shall i inform you of [something] better than that?  for 
those who fear allah will be gardens in the presence of their 
lord beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally, 
and purified spouses and approval from allah.  and allah is 
seeing [i.e., aware] of [his] servants –
16.
those who say, "our lord, indeed we have believed, so forgive
us our sins and protect us from the punishment of the fire,"
17.
the patient, the true, the obedient, those who spend [in the 
way of allah], and those who seek forgiveness before dawn.
                                               
99the believers saw the disbelievers to be double their own number preceding
the battle of badr, while, in fact, they were three times their number.


juz 3
47
18.
allah witnesses that there is no deity except him, and [so do] 
the angels and those of knowledge – [that he is] maintaining 
[creation] in justice.  there is no deity except him, the exalted
in might, the wise.
19.
indeed, the religion in the sight of allah is islam.  and those who
were given the scripture did not differ except after knowledge 
had come to them – out of jealous animosity between themselves.  
and whoever disbelieves in the verses of allah, then indeed, 
allah is swift in [taking] account.
20.
so if they argue with you, say, "i have submitted myself to allah
[in islam], and [so have] those who follow me."  and say to 
those who were given the scripture and [to] the unlearned,100
"have you submitted yourselves?"  and if they submit [in islam],
they are rightly guided; but if they turn away – then upon you 
is only the [duty of] notification.  and allah is seeing of [his] 
servants.
21.
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and kill the prophets 
without right and kill those who order justice from among the 
people – give them tidings of a painful punishment.
22.
they are the ones whose deeds have become worthless in this 
world and the hereafter, and for them there will be no helpers.
23.
do you not consider, [o muhammad], those who were given a 
portion of the scripture?  they are invited to the scripture of 
allah that it should arbitrate between them;101 then a party of 
them turns away, and they are refusing.
24.
that is because they say, "never will the fire touch us except 
for [a few] numbered days," and [because] they were deluded 
in their religion by what they were inventing.
25.
so how will it be when we assemble them for a day about 
                                               
100those who had no scripture (i.e., the pagans).
101referring to the jews of madinah who refused to implement the rulings 
given by allah in the torah or to acknowledge the prophet (), whose 
coming was mentioned therein.


juz 3
48
which there is no doubt?  and each soul will be compensated 
[in full for] what it earned, and they will not be wronged.
26.
say, "o allah, owner of sovereignty, you give sovereignty to
whom you will and you take sovereignty away from whom 
you will.  you honor whom you will and you humble whom 
you will.  in your hand102 is [all] good.  indeed, you are over 
all things competent.
27.
you cause the night to enter the day, and you cause the day to 
enter the night; and you bring the living out of the dead, and 
you bring the dead out of the living.  and you give provision 
to whom you will without account [i.e., limit or measure]."
28.
let not believers take disbelievers as allies [i.e., supporters or 
protectors] rather than believers.  and whoever [of you] does 
that has nothing [i.e., no association] with allah, except when 
taking precaution against them in prudence.103  and allah 
warns you of himself, and to allah is the [final] destination.
29.
say, "whether you conceal what is in your breasts or reveal it, 
allah knows it.  and he knows that which is in the heavens and
that which is on the earth.  and allah is over all things competent.
30.
the day every soul will find what it has done of good present 
[before it] and what it has done of evil, it will wish that 
between itself and that [evil] was a great distance.  and allah 
warns you of himself, and allah is kind to [his] servants."
31.
say, [o muhammad], "if you should love allah, then follow me, 
[so] allah will love you and forgive you your sins.  and allah 
is forgiving and merciful."
32.
say, "obey allah and the messenger."  but if they turn away –
then indeed, allah does not like the disbelievers.
33.
indeed, allah chose adam and noah and the family of ibrahim
and the family of imran over the worlds –
                                               
102see footnote to 2:19.
103when fearing harm from an enemy, the believer may pretend as long as 
his heart and intention are not affected.


juz 3
49
34.
descendants, some of them from others.  and allah is hearing
and knowing.
35.
[mention, o muhammad], when the wife of imran said, "my 
lord, indeed i have pledged to you what is in my womb, 
consecrated [for your service], so accept this from me.  
indeed, you are the hearing, the knowing."
36.
but when she delivered her, she said, "my lord, i have delivered
a female."  and allah was most knowing of what she delivered,
and the male is not like the female.  "and i have named her 
mary, and i seek refuge for her in you and [for] her descendants
from satan, the expelled [from the mercy of allah]."
37.
so her lord accepted her with good acceptance and caused her
to grow in a good manner and put her in the care of zechariah.  
every time zechariah entered upon her in the prayer chamber, 
he found with her provision.  he said, "o mary, from where is 
this [coming] to you?"  she said, "it is from allah.  indeed, 
allah provides for whom he wills without account."
38.
at that, zechariah called upon his lord, saying, "my lord, 
grant me from yourself a good offspring.  indeed, you are the 
hearer of supplication."
39.
so the angels called him while he was standing in prayer in 
the chamber, "indeed, allah gives you good tidings of john, 
confirming a word104 from allah and [who will be] honorable, 
abstaining [from women], and a prophet from among the righteous."
40.
he said, "my lord, how will i have a boy when i have 
reached old age and my wife is barren?"  he [the angel] said, 
"such is allah; he does what he wills."
41.
he said, "my lord, make for me a sign."  he said, "your sign 
is that you will not [be able to] speak to the people for three 
days except by gesture.  and remember your lord much and 
exalt [him with praise] in the evening and the morning."
                                               
104referring to the prophet jesus (upon whom be peace), who was conceived
merely by a command from allah – the word "be."


juz 3
50
42.
and [mention] when the angels said, "o mary, indeed allah 
has chosen you and purified you and chosen you above the 
women of the worlds.
43.
o mary, be devoutly obedient to your lord and prostrate and 
bow with those who bow [in prayer]."
44.
that is from the news of the unseen which we reveal to you, 
[o muhammad].  and you were not with them when they cast 
their pens105 as to which of them should be responsible for 
mary.  nor were you with them when they disputed.
45.
[and mention] when the angels said, "o mary, indeed allah 
gives you good tidings of a word106 from him, whose name 
will be the messiah, jesus, the son of mary – distinguished in 
this world and the hereafter and among those brought near [to 
allah].
46.
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and 
will be of the righteous."
47.
she said, "my lord, how will i have a child when no man has 
touched me?"  [the angel] said, "such is allah; he creates 
what he wills.  when he decrees a matter, he only says to it, 
'be,' and it is.
48.
and he will teach him writing and wisdom107 and the torah 
and the gospel
49.
and [make him] a messenger to the children of israel, [who 
will say], 'indeed i have come to you with a sign from your 
lord in that i design for you from clay [that which is] like the 
form of a bird, then i breathe into it and it becomes a bird by 
permission of allah.  and i cure the blind [from birth] and the 
leper, and i give life to the dead – by permission of allah.  
and i inform you of what you eat and what you store in your 
houses.  indeed in that is a sign for you, if you are believers.
                                               
105i.e., threw lots.
106see footnote to 3:39.
107the teachings of the prophets.


juz 3
51
50.
and [i have come] confirming what was before me of the 
torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden 
to you.  and i have come to you with a sign from your lord, 
so fear allah and obey me.
51.
indeed, allah is my lord and your lord, so worship him.  
that is the straight path.' "
52.
but when jesus felt [persistence in] disbelief from them, he said,
"who are my supporters for [the cause of] allah?"  the disciples
said, "we are supporters for allah.  we have believed in allah
and testify that we are muslims [submitting to him].
53.
our lord, we have believed in what you revealed and have 
followed the messenger [i.e., jesus], so register us among the 
witnesses [to truth]."
54.
and they [i.e., the disbelievers] planned, but allah planned.  
and allah is the best of planners.
55.
[mention] when allah said, "o jesus, indeed i will take you 
and raise you to myself and purify [i.e., free] you from those 
who disbelieve and make those who follow you [in submission
to allah alone] superior to those who disbelieve until the day 
of resurrection.  then to me is your return, and i will judge 
between you concerning that in which you used to differ.
56.
and as for those who disbelieved, i will punish them with a 
severe punishment in this world and the hereafter, and they 
will have no helpers."
57.
but as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, he will 
give them in full their rewards, and allah does not like the 
wrongdoers.
58.
this is what we recite to you, [o muhammad], of [our] verses
and the precise [and wise] message [i.e., the quran].
59.
indeed, the example of jesus to allah108 is like that of adam.  
he created him from dust; then he said to him, "be," and he was.
                                               
108i.e., regarding his creation of him.


juz 3
52
60.
the truth is from your lord, so do not be among the doubters.
61.
then whoever argues with you about it after [this] knowledge 
has come to you – say, "come, let us call our sons and your sons,
our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then 
supplicate earnestly [together] and invoke the curse of allah 
upon the liars [among us]."
62.
indeed, this is the true narration.  and there is no deity except 
allah.  and indeed, allah is the exalted in might, the wise.
63.
but if they turn away, then indeed – allah is knowing of the 
corrupters.
64.
say, "o people of the scripture, come to a word that is equitable 
between us and you – that we will not worship except allah 
and not associate anything with him and not take one another 
as lords instead of allah."109  but if they turn away, then say, 
"bear witness that we are muslims [submitting to him]."
65.
o people of the scripture, why do you argue about ibrahim 
while the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after 
him?  then will you not reason?
66.
here you are – those who have argued about that of which 
you have [some] knowledge, but why do you argue about that 
of which you have no knowledge?  and allah knows, while 
you know not.
67.
ibrahim was neither a jew nor a christian, but he was one 
inclining toward truth, a muslim [submitting to allah].  and 
he was not of the polytheists.110
68.
indeed, the most worthy of ibrahim among the people are 
those who followed him [in submission to allah] and this 
prophet [i.e., muhammad ()] and those who believe [in his 
message].  and allah is the ally of the believers.
69.
a faction of the people of the scripture wish they could 
                                               
109by obeying another in disobedience to allah.
110those who associate others with allah.


juz 3
53
mislead you.  but they do not mislead except themselves, and 
they perceive [it] not.
70.
o people of the scripture, why do you disbelieve in the verses 
of allah111 while you witness [to their truth]?
71.
o people of the scripture, why do you mix [i.e., confuse] the 
truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know 
[it]?
72.
and a faction of the people of the scripture say [to each other],
"believe in that which was revealed to the believers at the 
beginning of the day and reject it at its end that perhaps they 
will return [i.e., abandon their religion],
73.
and do not trust except those who follow your religion."  say, 
"indeed, the [true] guidance is the guidance of allah.  [do you 
fear] lest someone be given [knowledge] like you were given or
that they would [thereby] argue with you before your lord?"  
say, "indeed, [all] bounty is in the hand112 of allah – he 
grants it to whom he wills.  and allah is all-encompassing 
and wise."
74.
he selects for his mercy whom he wills.  and allah is the 
possessor of great bounty.
75.
and among the people of the scripture is he who, if you 
entrust him with a great amount [of wealth], he will return it 
to you.  and among them is he who, if you entrust him with 
a [single] silver coin, he will not return it to you unless you 
are constantly standing over him [demanding it].  that is 
because they say, "there is no blame upon us concerning the 
unlearned."113  and they speak untruth about allah while they 
know [it].
76.
but yes, whoever fulfills his commitment and fears allah –
then indeed, allah loves those who fear him.
                                               
111i.e., deliberately reject them.
112see footnote to 2:19.
113the jews do not consider it a sin to cheat or lie to a gentile or a pagan.


juz 3
54
77.
indeed, those who exchange the covenant of allah and their [own]
oaths for a small price will have no share in the hereafter, and 
allah will not speak to them or look at them on the day of 
resurrection, nor will he purify them; and they will have a 
painful punishment.
78.
and indeed, there is among them a party who alter the scripture
with their tongues so you may think it is from the scripture, but
it is not from the scripture.  and they say, "this is from allah,"
but it is not from allah.  and they speak untruth about allah 
while they know.
79.
it is not for a human [prophet]114 that allah should give him 
the scripture115 and authority and prophethood and then he 
would say to the people, "be servants to me rather than allah,"
but [instead, he would say], "be pious scholars of the lord 
because of what you have taught of the scripture and because 
of what you have studied."
80.
nor could he order you to take the angels and prophets as lords.  
would he order you to disbelief after you had been muslims?
81.
and [recall, o people of the scripture], when allah took the 
covenant of the prophets, [saying], "whatever i give you of 
the scripture and wisdom and then there comes to you a 
messenger confirming what is with you, you [must] believe in 
him and support him."  [allah] said, "have you acknowledged 
and taken upon that my commitment?"116  they said, "we 
have acknowledged it."  he said, "then bear witness, and i am 
with you among the witnesses."
82.
and whoever turned away after that – they were the defiantly 
disobedient.
83.
so is it other than the religion of allah they desire, while to 
him have submitted [all] those within the heavens and earth, 
willingly or by compulsion, and to him they will be returned?
                                               
114or any believer.
115or in the case of prophet muhammad (), "the book" (i.e., the quran).
116i.e., have you accepted this obligation?


juz 3
55
84.
say, "we have believed in allah and in what was revealed to 
us and what was revealed to ibrahim, ishmael, isaac, jacob, 
and the descendants [al-asbat], and in what was given to 
moses and jesus and to the prophets from their lord.  we 
make no distinction between any of them, and we are muslims 
[submitting] to him."
85.
and whoever desires other than islam as religion – never will 
it be accepted from him, and he, in the hereafter, will be 
among the losers.
86.
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their 
belief and had witnessed that the messenger is true and clear 
signs had come to them?  and allah does not guide the 
wrongdoing people.
87.
those – their recompense will be that upon them is the curse 
of allah and the angels and the people, all together,
88.
abiding eternally therein.  the punishment will not be lightened 
for them, nor will they be reprieved,
89.
except for those who repent after that117 and correct themselves.  
for indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
90.
indeed, those who disbelieve [i.e., reject the message] after their 
belief and then increase in disbelief – never will their [claimed]
repentance be accepted, and they are the ones astray.
91.
indeed, those who disbelieve and die while they are 
disbelievers – never would the [whole] capacity of the earth in 
gold be accepted from one of them if he would [seek to] ransom
himself with it.  for those there will be a painful punishment, 
and they will have no helpers.
92.
never will you attain the good [reward]118 until you spend [in 
the way of allah] from that which you love.  and whatever 
you spend – indeed, allah is knowing of it.
                                               
117after their wrongdoing.
118another meaning is "you will never attain righteousness."


juz 4
56
93. all food was lawful to the children of israel except what 
israel [i.e., jacob] had made unlawful to himself before the torah
was revealed.  say, [o muhammad], "so bring the torah and 
recite it, if you should be truthful."
94. and whoever invents about allah untruth after that – then those
are [truly] the wrongdoers.
95. say, "allah has told the truth.  so follow the religion of ibrahim,
inclining toward truth; and he was not of the polytheists."119
96. indeed, the first house [of worship] established for mankind 
was that at bakkah [i.e., makkah] – blessed and a guidance for 
the worlds.
97. in it are clear signs [such as] the standing place of ibrahim.  
and whoever enters it [i.e., the haram] shall be safe.  and [due]
to allah from the people is a pilgrimage to the house – for 
whoever is able to find thereto a way.  but whoever disbelieves
[i.e., refuses] – then indeed, allah is free from need of the worlds.120
98. say, "o people of the scripture, why do you disbelieve in the 
verses of allah while allah is witness over what you do?"
99. say, "o people of the scripture, why do you avert from the way 
of allah those who believe, seeking to make it [seem] deviant, 
while you are witnesses [to the truth]?  and allah is not unaware
of what you do."
100. o you who have believed, if you obey a party of those who were
given the scripture, they would turn you back, after your belief,
[to being] unbelievers.
101. and how could you disbelieve while to you are being recited 
the verses of allah and among you is his messenger?  and 
whoever holds firmly to allah121 has [indeed] been guided to 
a straight path.
                                               
119see footnote to 3:67.
120he has no need for his servants' worship; it is they who are in need of him.
121i.e., adhering to his ordinances strictly, then trusting in him and relying 
upon him completely.


juz 4
57
102. o you who have believed, fear allah as he should be feared 
and do not die except as muslims [in submission to him].
103. and hold firmly to the rope122 of allah all together and do not 
become divided.  and remember the favor of allah upon you –
when you were enemies and he brought your hearts together 
and you became, by his favor, brothers.  and you were on the 
edge of a pit of the fire, and he saved you from it.  thus does 
allah make clear to you his verses that you may be guided.
104. and let there be [arising] from you a nation inviting to [all that
is] good, enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong,123
and those will be the successful.
105. and do not be like the ones who became divided and differed 
after the clear proofs had come to them.  and those will have 
a great punishment
106. on the day [some] faces will turn white and [some] faces 
will turn black.  as for those whose faces turn black, [to them it
will be said], "did you disbelieve [i.e., reject faith] after your 
belief?  then taste the punishment for what you used to reject."
107. but as for those whose faces turn white, [they will be] within 
the mercy of allah.  they will abide therein eternally.
108. these are the verses of allah.  we recite them to you, [o 
muhammad], in truth; and allah wants no injustice to the 
worlds [i.e., his creatures].
109. to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is 
on the earth.  and to allah will [all] matters be returned.
110. you are the best nation produced [as an example] for mankind.  
you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe
in allah.  if only the people of the scripture had believed, it 
would have been better for them.  among them are believers, 
but most of them are defiantly disobedient.
                                               
122referring either to his covenant or the quran.
123according to the laws of allah.


juz 4
58
111. they will not harm you except for [some] annoyance.  and if 
they fight you, they will show you their backs [i.e., retreat]; 
then they will not be aided.
112. they have been put under humiliation [by allah] wherever they
are overtaken, except for a rope [i.e., covenant] from allah 
and a rope [i.e., treaty] from the people [i.e., the muslims].124  
and they have drawn upon themselves anger from allah and 
have been put under destitution.  that is because they disbelieved
in [i.e., rejected] the verses of allah and killed the prophets 
without right.  that is because they disobeyed and [habitually]
transgressed.
113. they are not [all] the same; among the people of the scripture
is a community125 standing [in obedience], reciting the verses 
of allah during periods of the night and prostrating [in prayer].
114. they believe in allah and the last day, and they enjoin what 
is right and forbid what is wrong and hasten to good deeds.  
and those are among the righteous.
115. and whatever good they do – never will it be removed from 
them.  and allah is knowing of the righteous.
116. indeed, those who disbelieve – never will their wealth or their 
children avail them against allah at all, and those are the 
companions of the fire; they will abide therein eternally.
117. the example of what they spend in this worldly life is like that
of a wind containing frost which strikes the harvest of a people
who have wronged themselves [i.e., sinned] and destroys it.  
and allah has not wronged them, but they wrong themselves.
118. o you who have believed, do not take as intimates those other 
than yourselves [i.e., believers], for they will not spare you 
                                               
124once they have surrendered, the people of the scripture retain their rights 
and honor (in spite of their refusal of islam) through payment of the 
jizyah tax in place of zakah and military service due from muslims.  they 
are then under the protection of the islamic state.
125of people who accepted islam.


juz 4
59
[any] ruin.  they wish you would have hardship.  hatred has 
already appeared from their mouths, and what their breasts
conceal is greater.  we have certainly made clear to you the 
signs, if you will use reason.
119. here you are loving them but they are not loving you, while 
you believe in the scripture – all of it.126  and when they meet 
you, they say, "we believe."  but when they are alone, they bite
their fingertips at you in rage.  say, "die in your rage.  indeed, 
allah is knowing of that within the breasts."
120. if good touches you, it distresses them; but if harm strikes you,
they rejoice at it.  and if you are patient and fear allah, their 
plot will not harm you at all.  indeed, allah is encompassing 
of what they do.
121. and [remember] when you, [o muhammad], left your family 
in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the 
battle [of uhud] – and allah is hearing and knowing –
122. when two parties among you were about to lose courage, but 
allah was their ally; and upon allah the believers should rely.
123. and already had allah given you victory at [the battle of] badr
while you were weak [i.e., few in number].  then fear allah; 
perhaps you will be grateful.
124. [remember] when you said to the believers, "is it not sufficient
for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand
angels sent down?
125. yes, if you remain patient and conscious of allah and they 
[i.e., the enemy] come upon you [attacking] in rage, your lord
will reinforce you with five thousand angels having marks [of 
distinction]."
126. and allah made it not except as [a sign of] good tidings for 
you and to reassure your hearts thereby.  and victory is not 
except from allah, the exalted in might, the wise –
                                               
126that of it revealed by allah, not what was subsequently altered by men.


juz 4
60
127. that he might cut down a section of the disbelievers or 
suppress them so that they turn back disappointed.
128. not for you, [o muhammad, but for allah], is the decision 
whether he should [cut them down] or forgive them or punish 
them, for indeed, they are wrongdoers.
129. and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on the earth.  he forgives whom he wills and punishes 
whom he wills.  and allah is forgiving and merciful.
130. o you who have believed, do not consume usury, doubled and 
multiplied, but fear allah that you may be successful.
131. and fear the fire, which has been prepared for the disbelievers.
132. and obey allah and the messenger that you may obtain mercy.
133. and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a garden [i.e., 
paradise] as wide as the heavens and earth, prepared for the 
righteous
134. who spend [in the cause of allah] during ease and hardship 
and who restrain anger and who pardon the people – and 
allah loves the doers of good;
135. and those who, when they commit an immorality or wrong 
themselves [by transgression], remember allah and seek 
forgiveness for their sins – and who can forgive sins except 
allah? – and [who] do not persist in what they have done 
while they know.
136. those – their reward is forgiveness from their lord and 
gardens beneath which rivers flow [in paradise], wherein they 
will abide eternally; and excellent is the reward of the 
[righteous] workers.
137. similar situations [as yours] have passed on before you, so 
proceed throughout the earth and observe how was the end of 
those who denied.
138. this [quran] is a clear statement to [all] the people and a 
guidance and instruction for those conscious of allah.


juz 4
61
139. so do not weaken and do not grieve, and you will be superior 
if you are [true] believers.
140. if a wound should touch you – there has already touched the 
[opposing] people a wound similar to it.  and these days [of 
varying conditions] we alternate among the people so that 
allah may make evident those who believe and [may] take to 
himself from among you martyrs – and allah does not like 
the wrongdoers –
141. and that allah may purify the believers [through trials] and 
destroy the disbelievers.
142. or do you think that you will enter paradise while allah has 
not yet made evident those of you who fight in his cause and 
made evident those who are steadfast?
143. and you had certainly wished for death [i.e., martyrdom] 
before you encountered it, and you have [now] seen it [before 
you] while you were looking on.
144. muhammad is not but a messenger.  [other] messengers have 
passed on before him.  so if he was to die or be killed, would 
you turn back on your heels [to unbelief]?  and he who turns 
back on his heels will never harm allah at all; but allah will 
reward the grateful.
145. and it is not [possible] for one to die except by permission of 
allah at a decree determined.  and whoever desires the reward
of this world – we will give him thereof; and whoever desires
the reward of the hereafter – we will give him thereof.  and 
we will reward the grateful.
146. and how many a prophet [fought and] with him fought many 
religious scholars.  but they never lost assurance due to what 
afflicted them in the cause of allah, nor did they weaken or 
submit.  and allah loves the steadfast.
147. and their words were not but that they said, "our lord, 
forgive us our sins and the excess [committed] in our affairs 
and plant firmly our feet and give us victory over the disbelieving
people."


juz 4
62
148. so allah gave them the reward of this world and the good 
reward of the hereafter.  and allah loves the doers of good.
149. o you who have believed, if you obey those who disbelieve, 
they will turn you back on your heels, and you will [then] 
become losers.
150. but allah is your protector, and he is the best of helpers.
151. we will cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve for 
what they have associated with allah of which he had not 
sent down [any] authority.  and their refuge will be the fire, 
and wretched is the residence of the wrongdoers.
152. and allah had certainly fulfilled his promise to you when 
you were killing them [i.e., the enemy] by his permission 
until [the time] when you lost courage and fell to disputing 
about the order [given by the prophet ()] and disobeyed 
after he had shown you that which you love.127  among you 
are some who desire this world, and among you are some 
who desire the hereafter.  then he turned you back from 
them [defeated] that he might test you.  and he has already 
forgiven you, and allah is the possessor of bounty for the 
believers.
153. [remember] when you [fled and] climbed [the mountain] 
without looking aside at anyone while the messenger was 
calling you from behind.  so allah repaid you with distress 
upon distress so you would not grieve for that which had 
escaped you [of victory and spoils of war] or [for] that which 
had befallen you [of injury and death].  and allah is [fully] 
acquainted with what you do.
154. then after distress, he sent down upon you security [in the 
form of] drowsiness, overcoming a faction of you, while 
another faction worried about themselves, thinking of allah 
other than the truth – the thought of ignorance, saying, "is 
there anything for us [to have done] in this matter?"  say, 
                                               
127i.e., the spoils of war.


juz 4
63
"indeed, the matter belongs completely to allah."  they 
conceal within themselves what they will not reveal to you.  
they say, "if there was anything we could have done in the 
matter, we [i.e., some of us] would not have been killed right 
here."  say, "even if you had been inside your houses, those 
decreed to be killed would have come out to their death beds."  
[it was] so that allah might test what is in your breasts and 
purify what is in your hearts.  and allah is knowing of that 
within the breasts.
155. indeed, those of you who turned back on the day the two 
armies met [at uhud] – it was satan who caused them to slip 
because of some [blame] they had earned.  but allah has already
forgiven them.  indeed, allah is forgiving and forbearing.
156. o you who have believed, do not be like those who disbelieved
and said about their brothers when they traveled through the 
land or went out to fight, "if they had been with us, they 
would not have died or have been killed," so allah makes that 
[misconception] a regret within their hearts.  and it is allah 
who gives life and causes death, and allah is seeing of what 
you do.
157. and if you are killed in the cause of allah or die – then 
forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than whatever
they accumulate [in this world].
158. and whether you die or are killed, unto allah you will be 
gathered.
159. so by mercy from allah, [o muhammad], you were lenient 
with them.  and if you had been rude [in speech] and harsh in 
heart, they would have disbanded from about you.  so pardon 
them and ask forgiveness for them and consult them in the 
matter.  and when you have decided, then rely upon allah.  
indeed, allah loves those who rely [upon him].
160. if allah should aid you, no one can overcome you; but if he 
should forsake you, who is there that can aid you after him?  
and upon allah let the believers rely.


juz 4
64
161. it is not [attributable] to any prophet that he would act 
unfaithfully [in regard to war booty].  and whoever betrays, 
[taking unlawfully], will come with what he took on the day 
of resurrection.  then will every soul be [fully] compensated 
for what it earned, and they will not be wronged.
162. so is one who pursues the pleasure of allah like one who 
brings upon himself the anger of allah and whose refuge is 
hell?  and wretched is the destination.
163. they are [varying] degrees in the sight of allah, and allah is 
seeing of whatever they do.
164. certainly did allah confer [great] favor upon the believers 
when he sent among them a messenger from themselves, 
reciting to them his verses and purifying them and teaching 
them the book [i.e., the quran] and wisdom,128 although they 
had been before in manifest error.
165. why [is it that] when a [single] disaster struck you [on the day 
of uhud], although you had struck [the enemy in the battle of 
badr] with one twice as great, you said, "from where is this?"  
say, "it is from yourselves [i.e., due to your sin]."  indeed, 
allah is over all things competent.
166. and what struck you on the day the two armies met [at uhud]
was by permission of allah that he might make evident the 
[true] believers
167. and that he might make evident those who are hypocrites.  
for it was said to them, "come, fight in the way of allah or 
[at least] defend."  they said, "if we had known [there would be]
fighting, we would have followed you."  they were nearer to 
disbelief that day than to faith, saying with their mouths what 
was not in their hearts.  and allah is most knowing of what 
they conceal –
168. those who said about their brothers while sitting [at home], 
"if they had obeyed us, they would not have been killed."  
                                               
128the prophet's sunnah.


juz 4
65
say, "then prevent death from yourselves, if you should be 
truthful."
169. and never think of those who have been killed in the cause of 
allah as dead.  rather, they are alive with their lord, 
receiving provision,
170. rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his bounty,
and they receive good tidings about those [to be martyred] 
after them who have not yet joined them – that there will be 
no fear concerning them, nor will they grieve.
171. they receive good tidings of favor from allah and bounty and 
[of the fact] that allah does not allow the reward of believers 
to be lost –
172. those [believers] who responded to allah and the messenger 
after injury had struck them.  for those who did good among 
them and feared allah is a great reward –
173. those to whom people [i.e., hypocrites] said, "indeed, the 
people have gathered against you, so fear them."  but it [merely]
increased them in faith, and they said, "sufficient for us is allah,
and [he is] the best disposer of affairs."
174. so they returned with favor from allah and bounty, no harm
having touched them.  and they pursued the pleasure of allah,
and allah is the possessor of great bounty.
175. that is only satan who frightens [you] of his supporters.  so 
fear them not, but fear me, if you are [indeed] believers.
176. and do not be grieved, [o muhammad], by those who hasten 
into disbelief.  indeed, they will never harm allah at all.  allah
intends that he should give them no share in the hereafter,
and for them is a great punishment.
177. indeed, those who purchase disbelief [in exchange] for faith –
never will they harm allah at all, and for them is a painful 
punishment.
178. and let not those who disbelieve ever think that [because] 
we extend their time [of enjoyment] it is better for them.  we 


juz 4
66
only extend it for them so that they may increase in sin, and 
for them is a humiliating punishment.
179. allah would not leave the believers in that [state] you are in 
[presently] until he separates the evil from the good.  nor 
would allah reveal to you the unseen.  but [instead], allah 
chooses of his messengers whom he wills, so believe in 
allah and his messengers.  and if you believe and fear him, 
then for you is a great reward.
180. and let not those who [greedily] withhold what allah has 
given them of his bounty ever think that it is better for them.  
rather, it is worse for them.  their necks will be encircled by 
what they withheld on the day of resurrection.  and to allah 
belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth.  and allah, 
with what you do, is [fully] acquainted.
181. allah has certainly heard the statement of those [jews] who said, 
"indeed, allah is poor, while we are rich."  we will record 
what they said and their killing of the prophets without right 
and will say, "taste the punishment of the burning fire.
182. that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah 
is not ever unjust to [his] servants."
183. [they are] those who said, "indeed, allah has taken our 
promise not to believe any messenger until he brings us an 
offering which fire [from heaven] will consume."  say, "there 
have already come to you messengers before me with clear 
proofs and [even] that of which you speak.  so why did you 
kill them, if you should be truthful?"
184. then if they deny you, [o muhammad] – so were messengers
denied before you, who brought clear proofs and written 
ordinances and the enlightening scripture.129
185. every soul will taste death, and you will only be given your 
[full] compensation on the day of resurrection.  so he who 
is drawn away from the fire and admitted to paradise has 
                                               
129the unaltered, original torah and gospel, which were revealed by allah.


juz 4
67
attained [his desire].  and what is the life of this world except
the enjoyment of delusion.
186. you will surely be tested in your possessions and in yourselves.  
and you will surely hear from those who were given the 
scripture before you and from those who associate others with 
allah much abuse.  but if you are patient and fear allah –
indeed, that is of the matters [worthy] of resolve.
187. and [mention, o muhammad], when allah took a covenant 
from those who were given the scripture, [saying], "you must 
make it clear [i.e., explain it] to the people and not conceal it."  
but they threw it away behind their backs and exchanged it 
for a small price.  and wretched is that which they purchased.
188. and never think that those who rejoice in what they have 
perpetrated and like to be praised for what they did not do –
never think them [to be] in safety from the punishment, and 
for them is a painful punishment.
189. and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the 
earth, and allah is over all things competent.
190. indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the 
alternation of the night and the day are signs for those of 
understanding –
191. who remember allah while standing or sitting or [lying] on 
their sides and give thought to the creation of the heavens 
and the earth, [saying], "our lord, you did not create this 
aimlessly; exalted are you [above such a thing]; then protect 
us from the punishment of the fire.
192. our lord, indeed whoever you admit to the fire – you have 
disgraced him, and for the wrongdoers there are no helpers.
193. our lord, indeed we have heard a caller [i.e., prophet 
muhammad ()] calling to faith, [saying], 'believe in your 
lord,' and we have believed.  our lord, so forgive us our sins 
and remove from us our misdeeds and cause us to die among
the righteous.


juz 4
68
194. our lord, and grant us what you promised us through your
messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection.  
indeed, you do not fail in [your] promise."
195. and their lord responded to them, "never will i allow to be lost
the work of [any] worker among you, whether male or female;
you are of one another.  so those who emigrated or were evicted
from their homes or were harmed in my cause or fought or 
were killed – i will surely remove from them their misdeeds, 
and i will surely admit them to gardens beneath which rivers 
flow as reward from allah, and allah has with him the best 
reward."
196. be not deceived by the [uninhibited] movement of the 
disbelievers throughout the land.
197. [it is but] a small enjoyment; then their [final] refuge is hell, 
and wretched is the resting place.
198. but those who feared their lord will have gardens beneath
which rivers flow, abiding eternally therein, as accommodation
from allah.  and that which is with allah is best for the 
righteous.
199. and indeed, among the people of the scripture are those who 
believe in allah and what was revealed to you and what was 
revealed to them, [being] humbly submissive to allah.  they 
do not exchange the verses of allah for a small price.  those 
will have their reward with their lord.  indeed, allah is swift 
in account.
200. o you who have believed, persevere130 and endure131 and 
remain stationed132 and fear allah that you may be successful.
                                               
130in your religion and in the face of your enemies.
131in patience, outlasting your enemies, and against your own evil 
inclinations.
132posted at your positions against the enemy or in the mosques, awaiting prayers.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 4
69
surah an-nisa
133
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o mankind, fear your lord, who created you from one soul and 
created from it its mate and dispersed from both of them many 
men and women.  and fear allah, through whom134 you ask one 
another,135 and the wombs.136  indeed allah is ever,137 over you, 
an observer.
2. and give to the orphans their properties and do not substitute 
the defective [of your own] for the good [of theirs].  and do not 
consume their properties into your own.  indeed, that is ever a 
great sin.
3. and if you fear that you will not deal justly with the orphan 
girls, then marry those that please you of [other] women, two or 
three or four.  but if you fear that you will not be just, then 
[marry only] one or those your right hands possess [i.e., slaves].  
that is more suitable that you may not incline [to injustice].
4. and give the women [upon marriage] their [bridal] gifts138
graciously.  but if they give up willingly to you anything of it, 
then take it in satisfaction and ease.139
5. and do not give the weak-minded your property,140 which allah 
                                               
133an-nisa:  the women.
134in whose name.
135i.e., request favors and demand rights.
136i.e., fear allah in regard to relations of kinship.
137when used in conjunction with allah's attributes, the word "ever" 
(occurring repeatedly throughout this surah and elsewhere, such as in 
surah al-ahzab) is quite inadequate in imparting the sense of continuation
expressed by the word "kana" in arabic, which indicates "always was, is, 
and always will be."
138the obligatory bridal gift (mahr).
139knowing that it is lawful.
140although it is their property, allah (subhanahu wa taala) refers to it in 
the collective sense, reminding us that all wealth is provided by him for 
the maintenance of the community as well as of individual members.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 4
70
has made a means of sustenance for you, but provide for them 
with it and clothe them and speak to them words of appropriate
kindness.
6.
and test the orphans [in their abilities] until they reach marriageable
age.  then if you perceive in them sound judgement, release their
property to them.  and do not consume it excessively and quickly,
[anticipating] that they will grow up.  and whoever, [when acting
as guardian], is self-sufficient should refrain [from taking a fee];
and whoever is poor – let him take according to what is acceptable.  
then when you release their property to them, bring witnesses 
upon them.  and sufficient is allah as accountant.
7.
for men is a share of what the parents and close relatives leave,
and for women is a share of what the parents and close relatives 
leave, be it little or much – an obligatory share.
8.
and when [other] relatives and orphans and the needy are present
at the [time of] division, then provide for them [something] out
of it [i.e., the estate] and speak to them words of appropriate 
kindness.
9.
and let those [executors and guardians] fear [injustice] as if they
[themselves] had left weak offspring behind and feared for them.  
so let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice.
10.
indeed, those who devour the property of orphans unjustly are 
only consuming into their bellies fire.  and they will be burned
in a blaze [i.e., hellfire].
11.
allah instructs you concerning your children [i.e., their portions
of inheritance]:  for the male, what is equal to the share of two 
females.  but if there are [only] daughters, two or more, for 
them is two thirds of one's estate.141  and if there is only one, 
for her is half.  and for one's parents, to each one of them is a 
sixth of his estate if he left children.  but if he had no children 
and the parents [alone] inherit from him, then for his mother is 
one third.  and if he had brothers [and/or sisters], for his mother
                                               
141literally, "that which he left."

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 4
71
is a sixth,142 after any bequest he [may have] made or debt.143  
your parents or your children – you know not which of them 
are nearest to you in benefit.  [these shares are] an obligation 
[imposed] by allah.  indeed, allah is ever knowing and wise.
12.
and for you is half of what your wives leave if they have no child.  
but if they have a child, for you is one fourth of what they 
leave, after any bequest they [may have] made or debt.  and 
for them [i.e., the wives] is one fourth if you leave no child.  
but if you leave a child, then for them is an eighth of what 
you leave, after any bequest you [may have] made or debt.  
and if a man or woman leaves neither ascendants nor descendants 
but has a brother or a sister, then for each one of them is a 
sixth.  but if they are more than two, they share a third,144
after any bequest which was made or debt, as long as there is 
no detriment [caused].145  [this is] an ordinance from allah, 
and allah is knowing and forbearing.
13.
these are the limits [set by] allah, and whoever obeys allah 
and his messenger will be admitted by him to gardens [in 
paradise] under which rivers flow, abiding eternally therein; 
and that is the great attainment.
14.
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses
his limits – he will put him into the fire to abide eternally 
therein, and he will have a humiliating punishment.
15.
those who commit immorality [i.e., unlawful sexual intercourse]
of your women – bring against them four [witnesses] from 
                                               
142although the siblings themselves do not inherit in this case.
143based upon prophetic hadiths, scholars have ruled that debt takes precedent
over a bequest, that a bequest may not include any who inherit by law, 
and that the total bequest may not be more than one third of one's estate.  
after the fulfillment of debts and bequests (if any), the remainder of the 
estate is to be divided according to the ordinances in this surah.
144these shares are divided equally between males and females.
145this is a condition for any bequest.  if it has been violated by the deceased,
his bequest is not to be honored, or it may be adjusted by the executor.  
see 2:182.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 4
72
among you.  and if they testify,146 confine them [i.e., the 
guilty women] to houses until death takes them or allah 
ordains for them [another] way.147
16.
and the two148 who commit it [i.e., unlawful sexual intercourse]
among you – punish [i.e., dishonor] them both.  but if they repent
and correct themselves, leave them alone.  indeed, allah is ever
accepting of repentance and merciful.
17.
the repentance accepted by allah is only for those who do
wrong in ignorance [or carelessness] and then repent soon after.  
it is those to whom allah will turn in forgiveness, and allah is 
ever knowing and wise.
18.
but repentance is not [accepted] of those who [continue to] do 
evil deeds up until, when death comes to one of them, he says, 
"indeed, i have repented now," or of those who die while they are
disbelievers.  for them we have prepared a painful punishment.
19.
o you who have believed, it is not lawful for you to inherit 
women by compulsion.149  and do not make difficulties for 
them in order to take [back] part of what you gave them150
unless they commit a clear immorality [i.e., adultery].  and 
live with them in kindness.  for if you dislike them – perhaps 
you dislike a thing and allah makes therein much good.
20.
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have 
given one of them a great amount [in gifts], do not take [back] 
from it anything.  would you take it in injustice and manifest 
sin?
                                               
146the witnesses must swear to actually having seen the act taking place.
147the "other way" (i.e., penalty) was later revealed in 24:2, canceling the 
ruling in this verse.
148scholars differ over whether "the two" refers to two of the same sex (i.e., 
homosexuals) or those of opposite sexes.  in either case, later rulings 
outlined in the sunnah have replaced this one.
149the deceased man's heirs have no rights of marriage or otherwise over 
his widow.
150at the time of marriage as mahr.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
73
21.
and how could you take it while you have gone in unto each 
other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant?
22.
and do not marry those [women] whom your fathers married, 
except what has already occurred.151  indeed, it was an immorality
and hateful [to allah] and was evil as a way.
23.
prohibited to you [for marriage] are your mothers, your 
daughters, your sisters, your father's sisters, your mother's 
sisters, your brother's daughters, your sister's daughters, your 
[milk] mothers who nursed you, your sisters through nursing, 
your wives' mothers, and your step-daughters under your 
guardianship [born] of your wives unto whom you have gone in.  
but if you have not gone in unto them, there is no sin upon you.  
and [also prohibited are] the wives of your sons who are from 
your [own] loins, and that you take [in marriage] two sisters 
simultaneously, except for what has already occurred.152  
indeed, allah is ever forgiving and merciful.
24.
and [also prohibited to you are all] married women except
those your right hands possess.153  [this is] the decree of allah
upon you.  and lawful to you are [all others] beyond these, 
[provided] that you seek them [in marriage] with [gifts from] 
your property, desiring chastity, not unlawful sexual intercourse.  
so for whatever you enjoy [of marriage] from them, give them 
their due compensation154 as an obligation.  and there is no 
blame upon you for what you mutually agree to beyond the 
obligation.  indeed, allah is ever knowing and wise.
25.
and whoever among you cannot [find] the means to marry free, 
believing women, then [he may marry] from those whom your 
right hands possess of believing slave girls.  and allah is most
                                               
151before islam.  after the ruling was revealed by allah, men were required 
to release those women unlawful to them (e.g., a stepmother, one of two 
sisters, or any wives over the limit of four).  the same obligation applies 
to one once he has accepted islam.
152see previous footnote.
153i.e., slaves or war captives who had polytheist husbands.
154the mahr, a specified gift to the bride required of the man upon marriage.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
74
knowing about your faith.  you [believers] are of one another.  
so marry them with the permission of their people and give 
them their due compensation [i.e., mahr] according to what is 
acceptable.  [they should be] chaste, neither [of] those who 
commit unlawful intercourse randomly nor those who take 
[secret] lovers.  but once they are sheltered in marriage, if they
should commit adultery, then for them is half the punishment 
for free [unmarried] women.  this [allowance] is for him among
you who fears affliction [i.e., sin], but to be patient is better 
for you.  and allah is forgiving and merciful.
26.
allah wants to make clear to you [the lawful from the unlawful]
and guide you to the [good] practices of those before you and 
to accept your repentance.  and allah is knowing and wise.
27.
allah wants to accept your repentance, but those who follow 
[their] passions want you to digress [into] a great deviation.
28.
and allah wants to lighten for you [your difficulties]; and 
mankind was created weak.
29.
o you who have believed, do not consume one another's wealth
unjustly155 but only [in lawful] business by mutual consent.  
and do not kill yourselves [or one another].  indeed, allah is 
to you ever merciful.
30.
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice – then we 
will drive him into a fire.  and that, for allah, is [always] easy.
31.
if you avoid the major sins which you are forbidden, we will 
remove from you your lesser sins and admit you to a noble 
entrance [into paradise].
32.
and do not wish for that by which allah has made some of 
you exceed others.  for men is a share of what they have 
earned, and for women is a share of156 what they have earned.  
and ask allah of his bounty.  indeed allah is ever, of all 
things, knowing.
                                               
155i.e., unlawfully or under false pretense.
156this may refer to shares of inheritance, wages and reward in the hereafter.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
75
33.
and for all, we have made heirs to what is left by parents and 
relatives.  and to those whom your oaths have bound [to you] –
give them their share.157  indeed allah is ever, over all things, 
a witness.
34.
men are in charge of women158 by [right of] what allah has 
given one over the other and what they spend [for maintenance]
from their wealth.  so righteous women are devoutly obedient, 
guarding in [the husband's] absence what allah would have 
them guard.159  but those [wives] from whom you fear 
arrogance – [first] advise them; [then if they persist], forsake 
them in bed; and [finally], strike them.160  but if they obey you 
[once more], seek no means against them.  indeed, allah is 
ever exalted and grand.
35.
and if you fear dissension between the two, send an arbitrator 
from his people and an arbitrator from her people.  if they 
both desire reconciliation, allah will cause it between them.  
indeed, allah is ever knowing and acquainted [with all things].
36.
worship allah and associate nothing with him, and to parents 
do good, and to relatives, orphans, the needy, the near neighbor,
the neighbor farther away, the companion at your side,161 the 
traveler, and those whom your right hands possess.  indeed, 
allah does not like those who are self-deluding and boastful,
37.
who are stingy and enjoin upon [other] people stinginess and 
conceal what allah has given them of his bounty – and we 
have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment –
38.
and [also] those who spend of their wealth to be seen by the 
people and believe not in allah nor in the last day.  and he 
to whom satan is a companion – then evil is he as a companion.
                                               
157by bequest, as only those relatives mentioned in verses 11 and 12 inherit 
fixed shares.
158this applies primarily to the husband-wife relationship.
159i.e., their husbands' property and their own chastity.
160as a last resort.  it is unlawful to strike the face or to cause bodily injury.
161i.e., those whose acquaintance you have made.  also interpreted as the wife.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
76
39.
and what [harm would come] upon them if they believed in 
allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided 
for them?  and allah is ever, about them, knowing.
40.
indeed, allah does not do injustice, [even] as much as an 
atom's weight; while if there is a good deed, he multiplies it 
and gives from himself a great reward.
41.
so how [will it be] when we bring from every nation a witness 
and we bring you, [o muhammad], against these [people] as 
a witness?
42.
that day, those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger
will wish they could be covered by the earth.  and they will 
not conceal from allah a [single] statement.
43.
o you who have believed, do not approach prayer while you 
are intoxicated until you know what you are saying162 or in a 
state of janabah,163 except those passing through [a place of 
prayer], until you have washed [your whole body].  and if 
you are ill or on a journey or one of you comes from the place 
of relieving himself or you have contacted women [i.e., had 
sexual intercourse] and find no water, then seek clean earth 
and wipe over your faces and your hands [with it].  indeed, 
allah is ever pardoning and forgiving.
44.
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the 
scripture, purchasing error [in exchange for it] and wishing 
you would lose the way?
45.
and allah is most knowing of your enemies; and sufficient is 
allah as an ally, and sufficient is allah as a helper.
46.
among the jews are those who distort words from their 
[proper] places [i.e., usages] and say, "we hear and disobey" 
and "hear but be not heard" and "raina,"164 twisting their 
tongues and defaming the religion.  and if they had said [instead],
                                               
162the use of intoxicants was later prohibited completely.  see 5:90-91.
163literally, "distance."  the state of one under obligation to perform ghusl
(a complete bath) due to having had sexual intercourse or ejaculation.
164see footnote to 2:104.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
77
"we hear and obey" and "wait for us [to understand]," it would 
have been better for them and more suitable.  but allah has cursed
them for their disbelief, so they believe not, except for a few.165
47.
o you who were given the scripture, believe in what we have 
sent down [to muhammad ()], confirming that which is 
with you, before we obliterate faces and turn them toward 
their backs or curse them as we cursed the sabbath-breakers.166  
and ever is the matter [i.e., decree] of allah accomplished.
48.
indeed, allah does not forgive association with him, but he 
forgives what is less than that for whom he wills.  and he 
who associates others with allah has certainly fabricated a 
tremendous sin.
49.
have you not seen those who claim themselves to be pure?  
rather, allah purifies whom he wills, and injustice is not 
done to them, [even] as much as a thread [inside a date seed].
50.
look how they invent about allah untruth, and sufficient is 
that as a manifest sin.
51.
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the 
scripture, who believe in jibt [superstition] and taghut [false 
objects of worship] and say about the disbelievers, "these are 
better guided than the believers as to the way"?
52.
those are the ones whom allah has cursed; and he whom 
allah curses – never will you find for him a helper.
53.
or have they a share of dominion?  then [if that were so], 
they would not give the people [even as much as] the speck on 
a date seed.
54.
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his 
bounty?  but we had already given the family of ibrahim the 
scripture and wisdom167 and conferred upon them a great 
kingdom.
                                               
165or "except with little belief."
166see 7:163-166.
167prophetic teachings.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
78
55.
and some among them believed in it,168 and some among 
them were averse to it.  and sufficient is hell as a blaze.
56.
indeed, those who disbelieve in our verses – we will drive 
them into a fire.  every time their skins are roasted through 
we will replace them with other skins so they may taste the 
punishment.  indeed, allah is ever exalted in might and wise.
57.
but those who believe and do righteous deeds – we will admit 
them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they 
abide forever.  for them therein are purified spouses, and we 
will admit them to deepening shade.
58.
indeed, allah commands you to render trusts to whom they are 
due and when you judge between people to judge with justice.
excellent is that which allah instructs you.  indeed, allah is 
ever hearing and seeing.
59.
o you who have believed, obey allah and obey the messenger 
and those in authority among you.  and if you disagree over 
anything, refer it to allah and the messenger, if you should 
believe in allah and the last day.  that is the best [way] and 
best in result.
60.
have you not seen those who claim to have believed in what 
was revealed to you, [o muhammad], and what was revealed 
before you?  they wish to refer legislation to taghut,169 while 
they were commanded to reject it; and satan wishes to lead 
them far astray.
61.
and when it is said to them, "come to what allah has revealed
and to the messenger," you see the hypocrites turning away 
from you in aversion.
62.
so how [will it be] when disaster strikes them because of what 
their hands have put forth and then they come to you swearing 
by allah, "we intended nothing but good conduct and 
accommodation."
                                               
168in what was given to them.  also interpreted as "in him," i.e., muhammad ().
169false objects of worship or those transgressors who usurp the divine right 
of government.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
79
63.
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts,
so turn away from them170 but admonish them and speak to 
them a far-reaching [i.e., effective] word.
64.
and we did not send any messenger except to be obeyed by 
permission of allah.  and if, when they wronged themselves, 
they had come to you, [o muhammad], and asked forgiveness 
of allah and the messenger had asked forgiveness for them, 
they would have found allah accepting of repentance and 
merciful.
65.
but no, by your lord, they will not [truly] believe until they 
make you, [o muhammad], judge concerning that over which 
they dispute among themselves and then find within themselves
no discomfort from what you have judged and submit in [full, 
willing] submission.
66.
and if we had decreed upon them, "kill yourselves" or 
"leave your homes," they would not have done it, except for a 
few of them.  but if they had done what they were instructed, 
it would have been better for them and a firmer position [for 
them in faith].
67.
and then we would have given them from us a great reward.
68.
and we would have guided them to a straight path.
69.
and whoever obeys allah and the messenger – those will be with
the ones upon whom allah has bestowed favor of the prophets,
the steadfast affirmers of truth, the martyrs and the righteous.  
and excellent are those as companions.
70.
that is the bounty from allah, and sufficient is allah as knower.
71.
o you who have believed, take your precaution and [either] go 
forth in companies or go forth all together.
72.
and indeed, there is among you he who lingers behind; and if 
disaster strikes you, he says, "allah has favored me in that i 
was not present with them."
                                               
170i.e., use not violence against them.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
80
73.
but if bounty comes to you from allah, he will surely say, as if
[i.e., showing that] there had never been between you and him 
any affection, "oh, i wish i had been with them so i could 
have attained a great attainment."171
74.
so let those fight in the cause of allah who sell the life of this 
world for the hereafter.  and he who fights in the cause of 
allah and is killed or achieves victory – we will bestow upon 
him a great reward.
75.
and what is [the matter] with you that you fight not in the 
cause of allah and [for] the oppressed among men, women, 
and children who say, "our lord, take us out of this city of 
oppressive people and appoint for us from yourself a protector
and appoint for us from yourself a helper"?
76.
those who believe fight in the cause of allah, and those who 
disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut.172  so fight against the 
allies of satan.  indeed, the plot of satan has ever been weak.
77.
have you not seen those who were told, "restrain your hands 
[from fighting]173 and establish prayer and give zakah"?  but 
then when fighting was ordained for them, at once a party of 
them feared men as they fear allah or with [even] greater fear.  
they said, "our lord, why have you decreed upon us fighting?  
if only you had postponed [it for] us for a short time."  say, 
"the enjoyment of this world is little, and the hereafter is 
better for he who fears allah.  and injustice will not be done 
to you, [even] as much as a thread [inside a date seed]."
78.
wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even if you 
should be within towers of lofty construction.  but if good
comes to them, they say, "this is from allah"; and if evil befalls
them, they say,174 "this is from you."  say, "all [things] are 
                                               
171the spoils of war.  although having pretended to befriend the believers in 
support of allah's religion, the hypocrite will not be willing to fight except
for material gain.
172see footnote to 4:60.
173before permission was given by allah.
174addressing the prophet ().

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
81
from allah."  so what is [the matter] with those people that 
they can hardly understand any statement?
79.
what comes to you of good is from allah, but what comes to 
you of evil, [o man], is from yourself.175  and we have sent you,
[o muhammad], to the people as a messenger, and sufficient 
is allah as witness.
80.
he who obeys the messenger has obeyed allah; but those who
turn away – we have not sent you over them as a guardian.
81.
and they say, "[we pledge] obedience."  but when they leave 
you, a group of them spend the night determining to do other 
than what you say.  but allah records what they plan by night.  
so leave them alone and rely upon allah.  and sufficient is 
allah as disposer of affairs.
82.
then do they not reflect upon the quran?176  if it had been 
from [any] other than allah, they would have found within it 
much contradiction.
83.
and when there comes to them something [i.e., information] 
about [public] security or fear, they spread it around.  but if 
they had referred it back to the messenger or to those of 
authority among them, then the ones who [can] draw correct 
conclusions from it would have known about it.  and if not 
for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy, you would 
have followed satan, except for a few.
84.
so fight, [o muhammad], in the cause of allah; you are not 
held responsible except for yourself.  and encourage the 
believers [to join you] that perhaps allah will restrain the 
[military] might of those who disbelieve.  and allah is greater 
in might and stronger in [exemplary] punishment.177
85.
whoever intercedes for a good cause will have a share [i.e., 
reward] therefrom; and whoever intercedes for an evil cause 
                                               
175as a result of your mistakes or sins.
176i.e., its meanings and its objective.
177allah is able to defeat them in such a way as to deter others from attempting
anything similar.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
82
will have a portion [i.e., burden] therefrom.  and ever is allah,
over all things, a keeper.178
86.
and when you are greeted with a greeting, greet [in return] 
with one better than it or [at least] return it [in a like manner].  
indeed allah is ever, over all things, an accountant.
87.
allah – there is no deity except him.  he will surely assemble 
you for [account on] the day of resurrection, about which there
is no doubt.  and who is more truthful than allah in statement.
88.
what is [the matter] with you [that you are] two groups 
concerning the hypocrites,179 while allah has made them fall
back [into error and disbelief] for what they earned.180  do 
you wish to guide those whom allah has sent astray?  and he 
whom allah sends astray – never will you find for him a way 
[of guidance].181
89.
they wish you would disbelieve as they disbelieved so you 
would be alike.  so do not take from among them allies until 
they emigrate for the cause of allah.  but if they turn away 
[i.e., refuse], then seize them and kill them wherever you find 
them and take not from among them any ally or helper,
90.
except for those who take refuge with a people between 
yourselves and whom is a treaty or those who come to you, their
hearts strained at [the prospect of] fighting you or fighting 
their own people.  and if allah had willed, he could have 
given them power over you, and they would have fought you.  
so if they remove themselves from you and do not fight you 
and offer you peace, then allah has not made for you a cause 
[for fighting] against them.
                                               
178providing, protecting, witnessing, keeping precise records and capable of 
recompense.
179i.e., divided between two viewpoints – whether or not they should be 
fought and killed.
180as the result of their disobedience and disloyalty.
181allah (subhanahu wa taala) leaves or sends astray those who choose to 
reject his guidance.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
83
91.
you will find others who wish to obtain security from you and 
[to] obtain security from their people.  every time they are 
returned to [the influence of] disbelief, they fall back into it.  
so if they do not withdraw from you or offer you peace or 
restrain their hands, then seize them and kill them wherever 
you overtake them.  and those – we have made for you against
them a clear authorization.
92.
and never is it for a believer to kill a believer except by mistake.  
and whoever kills a believer by mistake – then the freeing of 
a believing slave and a compensation payment [diyah] presented
to his [i.e., the deceased's] family [is required], unless they 
give [up their right as] charity.  but if he [i.e., the deceased] 
was from a people at war with you and he was a believer –
then [only] the freeing of a believing slave; and if he was from 
a people with whom you have a treaty – then a compensation 
payment presented to his family and the freeing of a believing 
slave.  and whoever does not find [one or cannot afford to buy
one] – then [instead], a fast for two months consecutively,182
[seeking] acceptance of repentance from allah.183  and allah 
is ever knowing and wise.
93.
but whoever kills a believer intentionally – his recompense is 
hell, wherein he will abide eternally, and allah has become 
angry with him and has cursed him and has prepared for him a 
great punishment.
94.
o you who have believed, when you go forth [to fight] in the 
cause of allah, investigate; and do not say to one who gives 
you [a greeting of] peace, "you are not a believer,"184 aspiring 
for the goods of worldly life; for with allah are many acquisitions.  
you [yourselves] were like that before; then allah conferred 
                                               
182uninterrupted except when there is an islamically valid reason, as in 
ramadhan.
183an accidental death usually results from some degree of negligence or 
error for which the believer feels the need to repent.
184do not assume that he pretends islam merely in order to save himself, for 
he may be sincere in faith.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
84
his favor [i.e., guidance] upon you, so investigate.  indeed 
allah is ever, with what you do, acquainted.
95. not equal are those believers remaining [at home] – other than 
the disabled – and the mujahideen, [who strive and fight] in 
the cause of allah with their wealth and their lives.  allah has 
preferred the mujahideen through their wealth and their lives 
over those who remain [behind], by degrees.  and to all [i.e., both] 
allah has promised the best [reward].  but allah has preferred 
the mujahideen over those who remain [behind] with a great 
reward –
96. degrees [of high position] from him and forgiveness and mercy.  
and allah is ever forgiving and merciful.
97. indeed, those whom the angels take [in death] while wronging 
themselves185 – [the angels] will say, "in what [condition] 
were you?"  they will say, "we were oppressed in the land."  
they [the angels] will say, "was not the earth of allah spacious
[enough] for you to emigrate therein?"  for those, their refuge 
is hell – and evil it is as a destination.
98. except for the oppressed among men, women, and children 
who cannot devise a plan nor are they directed to a way186 –
99. for those it is expected that allah will pardon them, and allah 
is ever pardoning and forgiving.
100. and whoever emigrates for the cause of allah will find on the 
earth many [alternative] locations and abundance.  and 
whoever leaves his home as an emigrant to allah and his 
messenger and then death overtakes him – his reward has 
already become incumbent upon allah.  and allah is ever 
forgiving and merciful.
101. and when you travel throughout the land, there is no blame 
                                               
185by preferring to remain among the disbelievers, although they have the means
to emigrate, in an environment where a muslim is unable to practice his 
religion freely.
186they are prevented by circumstances beyond their control.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
85
upon you for shortening the prayer,187 [especially] if you fear
that those who disbelieve may disrupt [or attack] you.188  
indeed, the disbelievers are ever to you a clear enemy.
102. and when you [i.e., the commander of an army] are among 
them and lead them in prayer,189 let a group of them stand [in 
prayer] with you and let them carry their arms.  and when 
they have prostrated, let them be [in position] behind you and 
have the other group come forward which has not [yet] prayed 
and let them pray with you, taking precaution and carrying 
their arms.  those who disbelieve wish that you would neglect 
your weapons and your baggage so they could come down 
upon you in one [single] attack.  but there is no blame upon 
you, if you are troubled by rain or are ill, for putting down 
your arms, but take precaution.  indeed, allah has prepared 
for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
103. and when you have completed the prayer, remember allah 
standing, sitting, or [lying] on your sides.  but when you 
become secure, re-establish [regular] prayer.  indeed, prayer has
been decreed upon the believers a decree of specified times.
104. and do not weaken in pursuit of the enemy.  if you should be 
suffering – so are they suffering as you are suffering, but you 
expect from allah that which they expect not.  and allah is 
ever knowing and wise.
105. indeed, we have revealed to you, [o muhammad], the book 
in truth so you may judge between the people by that which 
allah has shown you.  and do not be for the deceitful an 
advocate.
106. and seek forgiveness of allah.  indeed, allah is ever forgiving
and merciful.
                                               
187the four rakah prayers are shortened to two rakahs.
188the example of the prophet () and his companions illustrates that fear 
is not a condition for this allowance, merely travel.
189at times of fear on the battleground.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
86
107. and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves.  
indeed, allah loves not one who is a habitually sinful deceiver.
108. they conceal [their evil intentions and deeds] from the people,
but they cannot conceal [them] from allah, and he is with 
them [in his knowledge] when they spend the night in such as 
he does not accept of speech.  and ever is allah, of what they 
do, encompassing.
109. here you are – those who argue on their behalf in [this] 
worldly life – but who will argue with allah for them on the
day of resurrection, or who will [then] be their representative?
110. and whoever does a wrong or wrongs himself but then seeks 
forgiveness of allah will find allah forgiving and merciful.
111. and whoever earns [i.e., commits] a sin only earns it against 
himself.  and allah is ever knowing and wise.
112. but whoever earns an offense or a sin and then blames it on an 
innocent [person] has taken upon himself a slander and 
manifest sin.
113. and if it was not for the favor of allah upon you, [o 
muhammad], and his mercy, a group of them would have 
determined to mislead you.  but they do not mislead except 
themselves, and they will not harm you at all.  and allah has 
revealed to you the book and wisdom and has taught you that 
which you did not know.  and ever has the favor of allah 
upon you been great.
114. no good is there in much of their private conversation, except 
for those who enjoin charity or that which is right or conciliation
between people.  and whoever does that seeking means to the 
approval of allah – then we are going to give him a great reward.
115. and whoever opposes the messenger after guidance has 
become clear to him and follows other than the way of the 
believers – we will give him what he has taken190 and drive 
him into hell, and evil it is as a destination.
                                               
190i.e., make him responsible for his choice.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
87
116. indeed, allah does not forgive association with him, but he 
forgives what is less than that for whom he wills.  and he 
who associates others with allah has certainly gone far astray.
117. they call upon instead of him none but female [deities], and 
they [actually] call upon none but a rebellious satan,
118. whom allah has cursed.  for he had said, "i will surely take 
from among your servants a specific portion.
119. and i will mislead them, and i will arouse in them [sinful] 
desires, and i will command them so they will slit the ears of 
cattle, and i will command them so they will change the 
creation of allah."  and whoever takes satan as an ally 
instead of allah has certainly sustained a clear loss.
120. he [i.e., satan] promises them and arouses desire in them.  
but satan does not promise them except delusion.
121. the refuge of those will be hell, and they will not find from it 
an escape.
122. but the ones who believe and do righteous deeds – we will 
admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein 
they will abide forever.  [it is] the promise of allah, [which is]
truth, and who is more truthful than allah in statement.
123. it [i.e., paradise] is not [obtained] by your wishful thinking 
nor by that of the people of the scripture.  whoever does a 
wrong will be recompensed for it, and he will not find besides
allah a protector or a helper.
124. and whoever does righteous deeds, whether male or female, 
while being a believer – those will enter paradise and will not 
be wronged, [even as much as] the speck on a date seed.
125. and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to 
allah while being a doer of good and follows the religion of 
ibrahim, inclining toward truth?  and allah took ibrahim 
as an intimate friend.
126. and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on the earth.  and ever is allah, of all things, encompassing.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
88
127. and they request from you, [o muhammad], a [legal] ruling 
concerning women.  say, "allah gives you a ruling about 
them and [about] what has been recited to you in the book 
concerning the orphan girls to whom you do not give what is 
decreed for them191 – and [yet] you desire to marry them – and 
concerning the oppressed among children and that you maintain
for orphans [their rights] in justice."  and whatever you do of 
good – indeed, allah is ever knowing of it.
128. and if a woman fears from her husband contempt or evasion, 
there is no sin upon them if they make terms of settlement 
between them – and settlement is best.  and present in [human]
souls is stinginess.192  but if you do good and fear allah – then 
indeed allah is ever, with what you do, acquainted.
129. and you will never be able to be equal [in feeling] between 
wives, even if you should strive [to do so].  so do not incline 
completely [toward one] and leave another hanging.193  and if 
you amend [your affairs] and fear allah – then indeed, allah 
is ever forgiving and merciful.
130. but if they separate [by divorce], allah will enrich each [of 
them] from his abundance.  and ever is allah encompassing 
and wise.
131. and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on the earth.  and we have instructed those who were given 
the scripture before you and yourselves to fear allah.  but if 
you disbelieve – then to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens 
and whatever is on the earth.  and ever is allah free of need 
and praiseworthy.
132. and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on the earth.  and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs.
133. if he wills, he can do away with you, o people, and bring 
others [in your place].  and ever is allah competent to do that.
                                               
191i.e., their rights, in general, and their mahr, specifically.
192i.e., holding on to self-interests.
193neither divorced nor enjoying the rights of marriage.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 5
89
134. whoever desires the reward of this world – then with allah is 
the reward of this world and the hereafter.  and ever is allah 
hearing and seeing.
135. o you who have believed, be persistently standing firm in justice,
witnesses for allah, even if it be against yourselves or parents
and relatives.  whether one is rich or poor, allah is more 
worthy of both.194  so follow not [personal] inclination, lest 
you not be just.  and if you distort [your testimony] or refuse 
[to give it], then indeed allah is ever, with what you do, 
acquainted.
136. o you who have believed, believe195 in allah and his messenger
and the book that he sent down upon his messenger and the 
scripture which he sent down before.  and whoever disbelieves
in allah, his angels, his books, his messengers, and the last 
day has certainly gone far astray.
137. indeed, those who have believed then disbelieved, then believed
then disbelieved, and then increased in disbelief – never will 
allah forgive them, nor will he guide them to a way.
138. give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful 
punishment –
139. those who take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers.  
do they seek with them honor [through power]?  but indeed, 
honor belongs to allah entirely.196
140. and it has already come down to you in the book [i.e., the 
quran] that when you hear the verses of allah [recited], they 
are denied [by them] and ridiculed; so do not sit with them 
until they enter into another conversation.  indeed, you would 
then be like them.197  indeed, allah will gather the hypocrites 
and disbelievers in hell all together –
                                               
194i.e., more knowledgeable of their best interests.  therefore, adhere to what
he has enjoined upon you and testify honestly.
195i.e., renew, confirm and adhere to your belief.
196being the source of all power and honor, allah grants them to whom he wills.
197in this world, by participation in their blasphemy, and in the next, where 
you will share their punishment.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 6
90
141. those who wait [and watch] you.  then if you gain a victory 
from allah, they say, "were we not with you?"  but if the 
disbelievers have a success, they say [to them], "did we not 
gain the advantage over you, but we protected you from the 
believers?"  allah will judge between [all of] you on the day 
of resurrection, and never will allah give the disbelievers 
over the believers a way [to overcome them].198
142. indeed, the hypocrites [think to] deceive allah, but he is 
deceiving them.  and when they stand for prayer, they stand 
lazily, showing [themselves to] the people and not remembering
allah except a little,
143. wavering between them, [belonging] neither to these [i.e., the 
believers] nor to those [i.e., the disbelievers].  and whoever
allah leaves astray – never will you find for him a way.
144. o you who have believed, do not take the disbelievers as allies
instead of the believers.  do you wish to give allah against 
yourselves a clear case?
145. indeed, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire –
and never will you find for them a helper –
146. except for those who repent, correct themselves, hold fast to 
allah, and are sincere in their religion for allah, for those will 
be with the believers.  and allah is going to give the believers 
a great reward.
147. what would allah do with [i.e., gain from] your punishment if 
you are grateful and believe?  and ever is allah appreciative
and knowing.
148. allah does not like the public mention of evil except by one who 
has been wronged.  and ever is allah hearing and knowing.
149. if [instead] you show [some] good or conceal it or pardon an 
offense – indeed, allah is ever pardoning and competent.199
                                               
198in the hereafter, but possibly in this world as well.
199allah is always able to exact retribution, although he pardons out of his grace.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 6
91
150. indeed, those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers 
and wish to discriminate between allah and his messengers 
and say, "we believe in some and disbelieve in others," and 
wish to adopt a way in between –
151. those are the disbelievers, truly.  and we have prepared for 
the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
152. but they who believe in allah and his messengers and do not 
discriminate between any of them – to those he is going to 
give their rewards.  and ever is allah forgiving and merciful.
153. the people of the scripture ask you to bring down to them a 
book from the heaven.  but they had asked of moses [even] 
greater than that and said, "show us allah outright," so the 
thunderbolt struck them for their wrongdoing.  then they took
the calf [for worship] after clear evidences had come to them, 
and we pardoned that.  and we gave moses a clear authority.
154. and we raised over them the mount for [refusal of] their 
covenant; and we said to them, "enter the gate bowing humbly";
and we said to them, "do not transgress on the sabbath"; and 
we took from them a solemn covenant.
155. and [we cursed them]200 for their breaking of the covenant 
and their disbelief in the signs of allah and their killing of the 
prophets without right and their saying, "our hearts are wrapped"
[i.e., sealed against reception].  rather, allah has sealed them 
because of their disbelief, so they believe not, except for a 
few.201
156. and [we cursed them] for their disbelief and their saying 
against mary a great slander,202
157. and [for] their saying, "indeed, we have killed the messiah, 
jesus, the son of mary, the messenger of allah."  and they 
                                               
200another interpretation is "and [we made certain good foods unlawful to 
them]," based upon verse 160.
201or "except with little belief."
202when they accused her of fornication.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 6
92
did not kill him, nor did they crucify him; but [another] was 
made to resemble him to them.  and indeed, those who differ 
over it are in doubt about it.  they have no knowledge of it 
except the following of assumption.  and they did not kill him,
for certain.203
158. rather, allah raised him to himself.  and ever is allah 
exalted in might and wise.
159. and there is none from the people of the scripture but that he 
will surely believe in him [i.e., jesus] before his death.204  and 
on the day of resurrection he will be against them a witness.
160. for wrongdoing on the part of the jews, we made unlawful 
for them [certain] good foods which had been lawful to them, 
and for their averting from the way of allah many [people],
161. and [for] their taking of usury while they had been forbidden 
from it, and their consuming of the people's wealth unjustly.  
and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a 
painful punishment.
162. but those firm in knowledge among them and the believers 
believe in what has been revealed to you, [o muhammad], 
and what was revealed before you.  and the establishers of 
prayer [especially] and the givers of zakah and the believers in 
allah and the last day – those we will give a great reward.
163. indeed, we have revealed to you, [o muhammad], as we 
revealed to noah and the prophets after him.  and we revealed
to ibrahim, ishmael, isaac, jacob, the descendants,205 jesus, 
job, jonah, aaron, and solomon, and to david we gave the 
book [of psalms].
                                               
203another meaning is "and they did not kill him, being certain [of his identity]," 
i.e., they killed another assuming it was jesus (upon whom be peace).
204one interpretation is that "his death" refers to that of jesus after his return 
to earth.  or it can mean "the death of every individual from among the 
people of the scripture."
205al-asbat.  see footnote to 2:136.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 6
93
164. and [we sent] messengers about whom we have related 
[their stories] to you before and messengers about whom we 
have not related to you.  and allah spoke to moses with 
[direct] speech.
165. [we sent] messengers as bringers of good tidings and warners 
so that mankind will have no argument against allah after the 
messengers.  and ever is allah exalted in might and wise.
166. but allah bears witness to that which he has revealed to you.  
he has sent it down with his knowledge, and the angels bear 
witness [as well].  and sufficient is allah as witness.
167. indeed, those who disbelieve and avert [people] from the way 
of allah have certainly gone far astray.
168. indeed, those who disbelieve and commit wrong [or injustice] –
never will allah forgive them, nor will he guide them to a 
path,
169. except the path of hell; they will abide therein forever.  and 
that, for allah, is [always] easy.
170. o mankind, the messenger has come to you with the truth 
from your lord, so believe; it is better for you.  but if you 
disbelieve – then indeed, to allah belongs whatever is in the 
heavens and earth. and ever is allah knowing and wise.
171. o people of the scripture, do not commit excess in your 
religion206 or say about allah except the truth.  the messiah, 
jesus, the son of mary, was but a messenger of allah and his 
word which he directed to mary and a soul [created at a 
command] from him.  so believe in allah and his messengers.  
and do not say, "three"; desist – it is better for you.  indeed, 
allah is but one god.  exalted is he above having a son.  to 
him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on 
the earth.  and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs.
                                               
206such as attributing divine qualities to certain creations of allah or revering
them excessively.

surah 4 – an-nisa
juz 6
94
172. never would the messiah disdain to be a servant of allah, 
nor would the angels near [to him].  and whoever disdains 
his worship and is arrogant – he will gather them to himself 
all together.
173. and as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, he 
will give them in full their rewards and grant them extra from 
his bounty.  but as for those who disdained and were arrogant,
he will punish them with a painful punishment, and they will 
not find for themselves besides allah any protector or helper.
174. o mankind, there has come to you a conclusive proof from 
your lord, and we have sent down to you a clear light.207
175. so those who believe in allah and hold fast to him – he will 
admit them to mercy from himself and bounty and guide 
them to himself on a straight path.
176. they request from you a [legal] ruling.  say, "allah gives you 
a ruling concerning one having neither descendants nor 
ascendants [as heirs]."  if a man dies, leaving no child but 
[only] a sister, she will have half of what he left.  and he 
inherits from her if she [dies and] has no child.  but if there 
are two sisters [or more], they will have two thirds of what he 
left.  if there are both brothers and sisters, the male will have 
the share of two females.  allah makes clear to you [his law],
lest you go astray.  and allah is knowing of all things.
                                               
207showing the truth (i.e., the quran).

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
95
surah al-maidah
208
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o you who have believed, fulfill [all] contracts.209  lawful for 
you are the animals of grazing livestock except for that which is 
recited to you [in this quran] – hunting not being permitted 
while you are in the state of ihram.210  indeed, allah ordains 
what he intends.
2. o you who have believed, do not violate the rites of allah or 
[the sanctity of] the sacred month or [neglect the marking of] 
the sacrificial animals and garlanding [them] or [violate the 
safety of] those coming to the sacred house seeking bounty 
from their lord and [his] approval.  but when you come out of 
ihram, then [you may] hunt.  and do not let the hatred of a 
people for having obstructed you from al-masjid al-haram lead 
you to transgress.  and cooperate in righteousness and piety, 
but do not cooperate in sin and aggression.  and fear allah; 
indeed, allah is severe in penalty.
3. prohibited to you are dead animals,211 blood, the flesh of swine, 
and that which has been dedicated to other than allah, and 
[those animals] killed by strangling or by a violent blow or by a 
head-long fall or by the goring of horns, and those from which a 
wild animal has eaten, except what you [are able to] slaughter 
[before its death], and those which are sacrificed on stone altars,212
and [prohibited is] that you seek decision through divining arrows.  
that is grave disobedience.  this day those who disbelieve have 
despaired of [defeating] your religion; so fear them not, but fear me.  
this day i have perfected for you your religion and completed my 
                                               
208al-maidah:  the table, referring to the table spread with food requested 
by the disciples of jesus (upon whom be peace) in verse 112.
209which includes promises, covenants, oaths, etc.
210the state of ritual consecration for hajj or umrah.
211see footnote to 2:173.
212in the name of anything other than allah.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
96
favor upon you and have approved for you islam as religion.  
but whoever is forced by severe hunger with no inclination to sin –
then indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
4. they ask you, [o muhammad], what has been made lawful for 
them.  say, "lawful for you are [all] good foods and [game caught
by] what you have trained of hunting animals213 which you train 
as allah has taught you.  so eat of what they catch for you, and 
mention the name of allah upon it, and fear allah."  indeed, 
allah is swift in account.
5. this day [all] good foods have been made lawful, and the food 
of those who were given the scripture is lawful for you and 
your food is lawful for them.  and [lawful in marriage are] 
chaste women from among the believers and chaste women 
from among those who were given the scripture before you, 
when you have given them their due compensation,214 desiring 
chastity, not unlawful sexual intercourse or taking [secret] lovers.  
and whoever denies the faith – his work has become worthless, 
and he, in the hereafter, will be among the losers.
6. o you who have believed, when you rise to [perform] prayer, 
wash your faces and your forearms to the elbows and wipe over 
your heads and wash your feet to the ankles.  and if you are in a 
state of janabah,215 then purify yourselves.  but if you are ill or on
a journey or one of you comes from the place of relieving himself
or you have contacted women216 and do not find water, then seek 
clean earth and wipe over your faces and hands with it.  allah does 
not intend to make difficulty for you, but he intends to purify 
you and complete his favor upon you that you may be grateful.
7. and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with
which he bound you when you said, "we hear and we obey"; 
and fear allah.  indeed, allah is knowing of that within the breasts.
                                               
213such as dogs, falcons, etc.
214the specified bridal gift (mahr).
215see footnote to 4:43.
216i.e., had sexual intercourse.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
97
8.
o you who have believed, be persistently standing firm for allah,
witnesses in justice, and do not let the hatred of a people prevent 
you from being just.  be just; that is nearer to righteousness.  
and fear allah; indeed, allah is acquainted with what you do.
9.
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds 
[that] for them there is forgiveness and great reward.
10.
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs – those are the 
companions of hellfire.
11.
o you who have believed, remember the favor of allah upon you
when a people determined to extend their hands [in aggression]
against you, but he withheld their hands from you; and fear 
allah.  and upon allah let the believers rely.
12.
and allah had already taken a covenant from the children of 
israel, and we delegated from among them twelve leaders.  and
allah said, "i am with you.  if you establish prayer and give 
zakah and believe in my messengers and support them and loan
allah a goodly loan,217 i will surely remove from you your 
misdeeds and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow.  
but whoever of you disbelieves after that has certainly strayed 
from the soundness of the way."
13.
so for their breaking of the covenant we cursed them and 
made their hearts hardened.  they distort words from their 
[proper] places [i.e., usages] and have forgotten a portion of 
that of which they were reminded.218  and you will still 
observe deceit among them, except a few of them.  but pardon 
them and overlook [their misdeeds].  indeed, allah loves the 
doers of good.
14.
and from those who say, "we are christians" we took their 
covenant; but they forgot a portion of that of which they were 
reminded.219  so we caused among them220 animosity and 
                                               
217by spending in the cause of allah, seeking his reward.
218in the torah concerning the coming of prophet muhammad ().
219in the gospel concerning the coming of prophet muhammad ().
220i.e., among their various denominations or sects.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
98
hatred until the day of resurrection.  and allah is going to 
inform them about what they used to do.
15.
o people of the scripture, there has come to you our messenger
making clear to you much of what you used to conceal of the 
scripture and overlooking much.221  there has come to you 
from allah a light and a clear book [i.e., the quran]
16.
by which allah guides those who pursue his pleasure to the 
ways of peace222 and brings them out from darknesses into the 
light, by his permission, and guides them to a straight path.
17.
they have certainly disbelieved who say that allah is christ, 
the son of mary.  say, "then who could prevent allah at all if 
he had intended to destroy christ, the son of mary, or his mother
or everyone on the earth?"  and to allah belongs the dominion
of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them.  
he creates what he wills, and allah is over all things competent.
18.
but the jews and the christians say, "we are the children of 
allah and his beloved."  say, "then why does he punish you 
for your sins?"  rather, you are human beings from among 
those he has created.  he forgives whom he wills, and he 
punishes whom he wills.  and to allah belongs the dominion 
of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them, 
and to him is the [final] destination.
19.
o people of the scripture, there has come to you our messenger
to make clear to you [the religion] after a period [of suspension]
of messengers, lest you say, "there came not to us any bringer 
of good tidings or a warner."  but there has come to you a 
bringer of good tidings and a warner.  and allah is over all 
things competent.
20.
and [mention, o muhammad], when moses said to his people,
"o my people, remember the favor of allah upon you when 
                                               
221of your sin in that regard.
222i.e., security, well-being, integrity and escape from hellfire.  literally, 
"freedom from all evil."

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
99
he appointed among you prophets and made you possessors223
and gave you that which he had not given anyone among the 
worlds.
21.
o my people, enter the holy land [i.e., palestine] which allah
has assigned to you and do not turn back [from fighting in 
allah's cause] and [thus] become losers."
22.
they said, "o moses, indeed within it is a people of tyrannical 
strength, and indeed, we will never enter it until they leave it; 
but if they leave it, then we will enter."
23.
said two men from those who feared [to disobey] upon whom 
allah had bestowed favor, "enter upon them through the gate, 
for when you have entered it, you will be predominant.224  
and upon allah rely, if you should be believers."
24.
they said, "o moses, indeed we will not enter it, ever, as long 
as they are within it; so go, you and your lord, and fight.  
indeed, we are remaining right here."
25.
[moses] said, "my lord, indeed i do not possess [i.e., control] 
except myself and my brother, so part us225 from the defiantly 
disobedient people."
26.
[allah] said, "then indeed, it is forbidden to them for forty 
years [in which] they will wander throughout the land.  so do 
not grieve over the defiantly disobedient people."
27.
and recite to them the story of adam's two sons, in truth, 
when they both offered a sacrifice [to allah], and it was accepted
from one of them but was not accepted from the other.  said 
[the latter], "i will surely kill you."  said [the former], "indeed,
allah only accepts from the righteous [who fear him].
28.
if you should raise your hand against me to kill me – i shall 
                                               
223of all that you need – specifically, homes, wives and servants.  or 
"sovereigns," i.e., those of independent authority.
224i.e., if you obey the command of allah trusting in him, he will fulfill his 
promise to you.
225or "distinguish us" or "judge between us."

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
100
not raise my hand against you to kill you.  indeed, i fear allah,
lord of the worlds.
29.
indeed, i want you to obtain [thereby] my sin and your sin so 
you will be among the companions of the fire.  and that is the 
recompense of wrongdoers."
30.
and his soul permitted to him226 the murder of his brother, so 
he killed him and became among the losers.
31.
then allah sent a crow searching [i.e., scratching] in the 
ground to show him how to hide the disgrace227 of his brother.  
he said, "o woe to me!  have i failed to be like this crow and 
hide the disgrace [i.e., body] of my brother?"  and he became 
of the regretful.
32.
because of that, we decreed upon the children of israel that 
whoever kills a soul unless for a soul228 or for corruption 
[done] in the land229 – it is as if he had slain mankind entirely.  
and whoever saves one230 – it is as if he had saved mankind 
entirely.  and our messengers had certainly come to them with
clear proofs.  then indeed many of them, [even] after that, 
throughout the land, were transgressors.231
33.
indeed, the penalty232 for those who wage war233 against allah 
and his messenger and strive upon earth [to cause] corruption 
is none but that they be killed or crucified or that their hands 
and feet be cut off from opposite sides or that they be exiled 
from the land.  that is for them a disgrace in this world; and 
for them in the hereafter is a great punishment,
                                               
226i.e., the killer allowed himself.
227referring to the dead body, evidence of his shameful deed.
228i.e., in legal retribution for murder.
229i.e., that requiring the death penalty.
230or refrains from killing.
231heedless of allah's limits, negligent of their responsibilities.
232legal retribution.
233i.e., commit acts of violence and terrorism against individuals or treason 
and aggression against the islamic state.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
101
34.
except for those who return [repenting] before you overcome 
[i.e., apprehend] them.  and know that allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
35.
o you who have believed, fear allah and seek the means [of 
nearness] to him and strive in his cause that you may succeed.
36.
indeed, those who disbelieve – if they should have all that is 
in the earth and the like of it with it by which to ransom 
themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection, it 
will not be accepted from them, and for them is a painful 
punishment.
37.
they will wish to get out of the fire, but never are they to 
emerge therefrom, and for them is an enduring punishment.
38.
[as for] the thief, the male and the female, amputate their 
hands in recompense for what they earned [i.e., committed] as 
a deterrent [punishment] from allah.  and allah is exalted in 
might and wise.
39.
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms, indeed,
allah will turn to him in forgiveness.  indeed, allah is forgiving
and merciful.
40.
do you not know that to allah belongs the dominion of the 
heavens and the earth?  he punishes whom he wills and forgives
whom he wills, and allah is over all things competent.
41.
o messenger, let them not grieve you who hasten into disbelief
of those who say, "we believe" with their mouths, but their 
hearts believe not, and from among the jews.  [they are] avid 
listeners to falsehood, listening to another people who have 
not come to you.234  they distort words beyond their [proper] 
places [i.e., usages], saying, "if you are given this,235 take it; 
but if you are not given it, then beware."  but he for whom 
allah intends fitnah236 – never will you possess [power to do] 
                                               
234they had not attended the prophet's gatherings or heard his words.
235the legal ruling desired by them.
236the meaning here is misbelief, misconception, or self-delusion as a result 
of one's own refusal of truth.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
102
for him a thing against allah.  those are the ones for whom 
allah does not intend to purify their hearts.  for them in this 
world is disgrace, and for them in the hereafter is a great 
punishment.
42.
[they are] avid listeners to falsehood, devourers of [what is] 
unlawful.  so if they come to you, [o muhammad], judge 
between them or turn away from them.  and if you turn away 
from them – never will they harm you at all.  and if you 
judge, judge between them with justice.  indeed, allah loves 
those who act justly.
43.
but how is it that they come to you for judgement while they 
have the torah, in which is the judgement of allah?  then they
turn away, [even] after that; but those are not [in fact] believers.
44.
indeed, we sent down the torah, in which was guidance and 
light.  the prophets who submitted [to allah] judged by it for 
the jews, as did the rabbis and scholars by that with which 
they were entrusted of the scripture of allah, and they were 
witnesses thereto.  so do not fear the people but fear me, and 
do not exchange my verses for a small price [i.e., worldly gain].  
and whoever does not judge by what allah has revealed –
then it is those who are the disbelievers.
45.
and we ordained for them therein a life for a life, an eye for 
an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, 
and for wounds is legal retribution.  but whoever gives [up his 
right as] charity, it is an expiation for him.  and whoever does 
not judge by what allah has revealed – then it is those who 
are the wrongdoers [i.e., the unjust].
46.
and we sent, following in their footsteps,237 jesus, the son of 
mary, confirming that which came before him in the torah; 
and we gave him the gospel, in which was guidance and light 
and confirming that which preceded it of the torah as guidance
and instruction for the righteous.
                                               
237i.e., following the tradition of the prophets of the children of israel.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
103
47.
and let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has 
revealed therein.  and whoever does not judge by what allah 
has revealed – then it is those who are the defiantly disobedient.
48.
and we have revealed to you, [o muhammad], the book [i.e., 
the quran] in truth, confirming that which preceded it of the 
scripture and as a criterion over it.  so judge between them by 
what allah has revealed and do not follow their inclinations 
away from what has come to you of the truth.  to each of you 
we prescribed a law and a method.238  had allah willed, he 
would have made you one nation [united in religion], but [he 
intended] to test you in what he has given you; so race to [all 
that is] good.239  to allah is your return all together, and he will
[then] inform you concerning that over which you used to differ.
49.
and judge, [o muhammad], between them by what allah has 
revealed and do not follow their inclinations and beware of them,
lest they tempt you away from some of what allah has revealed
to you.  and if they turn away – then know that allah only intends 
to afflict them with some of their [own] sins.  and indeed, 
many among the people are defiantly disobedient.
50.
then is it the judgement of [the time of] ignorance they desire?  
but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who 
are certain [in faith].
51.
o you who have believed, do not take the jews and the christians
as allies.  they are [in fact] allies of one another.  and whoever
is an ally to them among you – then indeed, he is [one] of them.  
indeed, allah guides not the wrongdoing people.
52.
so you see those in whose hearts is disease [i.e., hypocrisy] 
hastening into [association with] them, saying, "we are afraid 
a misfortune may strike us."  but perhaps allah will bring 
conquest or a decision from him, and they will become, over 
what they have been concealing within themselves, regretful.
                                               
238prior to this revelation, which supersedes all previous scriptures.
239i.e., obedience to allah according to what he enjoined in the quran and 
through the sunnah of his prophet ().

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
104
53.
and those who believe will say,240 "are these the ones who 
swore by allah their strongest oaths that indeed they were 
with you?"  their deeds have become worthless, and they 
have become losers.
54.
o you who have believed, whoever of you should revert from 
his religion – allah will bring forth [in place of them] a 
people he will love and who will love him [who are] humble 
toward the believers, powerful against the disbelievers; they 
strive in the cause of allah and do not fear the blame of a critic.  
that is the favor of allah; he bestows it upon whom he wills.  
and allah is all-encompassing and knowing.
55.
your ally is none but allah and [therefore] his messenger and 
those who have believed – those who establish prayer and 
give zakah, and they bow [in worship].
56.
and whoever is an ally of allah and his messenger and those 
who have believed – indeed, the party of allah – they will be 
the predominant.
57.
o you who have believed, take not those who have taken your 
religion in ridicule and amusement among the ones who were 
given the scripture before you nor the disbelievers as allies.  
and fear allah, if you should [truly] be believers.
58.
and when you call to prayer, they take it in ridicule and 
amusement.  that is because they are a people who do not use 
reason.
59.
say, "o people of the scripture, do you resent us except [for 
the fact] that we have believed in allah and what was revealed 
to us and what was revealed before and because most of you 
are defiantly disobedient?"
60.
say, "shall i inform you of [what is] worse than that241 as 
penalty from allah?  [it is that of] those whom allah has 
                                               
240about the hypocrites after their exposure.
241referring to the punishment the people of the scripture (in their censure 
of the muslims) claimed was deserved by them.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
105
cursed and with whom he became angry and made of them 
apes and pigs and slaves of taghut.242  those are worse in 
position and further astray from the sound way."
61.
and when they come to you, they say, "we believe."  but 
they have entered with disbelief [in their hearts], and they 
have certainly left with it.  and allah is most knowing of 
what they were concealing.
62.
and you see many of them hastening into sin and aggression 
and the devouring of [what is] unlawful.  how wretched is 
what they have been doing.
63.
why do the rabbis and religious scholars not forbid them from 
saying what is sinful and devouring what is unlawful?  how 
wretched is what they have been practicing.
64.
and the jews say, "the hand of allah is chained."243  chained 
are their hands, and cursed are they for what they say.  rather, 
both his hands are extended; he spends however he wills.  
and that which has been revealed to you from your lord will 
surely increase many of them in transgression and disbelief.  
and we have cast among them animosity and hatred until the 
day of resurrection.  every time they kindled the fire of war 
[against you], allah extinguished it.  and they strive throughout
the land [causing] corruption, and allah does not like corrupters.
65.
and if only the people of the scripture had believed and 
feared allah, we would have removed from them their 
misdeeds and admitted them to gardens of pleasure.
66.
and if only they had upheld [the law of] the torah, the gospel,
and what has been revealed to them from their lord [i.e., the 
quran], they would have consumed [provision] from above 
them and from beneath their feet.244  among them are a 
moderate [i.e., acceptable] community, but many of them –
evil is that which they do.
                                               
242see footnote to 2:256.
243implying inability to give or stinginess.
244i.e., in great abundance.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 6
106
67.
o messenger, announce that which has been revealed to you
from your lord, and if you do not, then you have not conveyed
his message.  and allah will protect you from the people.  
indeed, allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
68.
say, "o people of the scripture, you are [standing] on nothing 
until you uphold [the law of] the torah, the gospel, and what 
has been revealed to you from your lord [i.e., the quran]."  
and that which has been revealed to you from your lord will 
surely increase many of them in transgression and disbelief.  
so do not grieve over the disbelieving people.
69.
indeed, those who have believed [in prophet muhammad ()] 
and those [before him ()] who were jews or sabeans or 
christians – those [among them] who believed in allah and 
the last day and did righteousness – no fear will there be 
concerning them, nor will they grieve.245
70.
we had already taken the covenant of the children of israel 
and had sent to them messengers.  whenever there came to 
them a messenger with what their souls did not desire, a party 
[of messengers] they denied, and another party they killed.
71.
and they thought there would be no [resulting] punishment, 
so they became blind and deaf.  then allah turned to them in 
forgiveness; then [again] many of them became blind and deaf.  
and allah is seeing of what they do.
72.
they have certainly disbelieved who say, "allah is the messiah, 
the son of mary" while the messiah has said, "o children of 
israel, worship allah, my lord and your lord."  indeed, he 
who associates others with allah – allah has forbidden him 
paradise, and his refuge is the fire.  and there are not for the 
wrongdoers any helpers.
73.
they have certainly disbelieved who say, "allah is the third of 
three."246  and there is no god except one god.  and if they do
                                               
245see footnote to 2:62.
246i.e., one part of three, referring to the christian concept of trinity.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
107
not desist from what they are saying, there will surely afflict 
the disbelievers among them a painful punishment.
74.
so will they not repent to allah and seek his forgiveness?  
and allah is forgiving and merciful.
75.
the messiah, son of mary, was not but a messenger; [other] 
messengers have passed on before him.  and his mother was a 
supporter of truth.  they both used to eat food.247  look how 
we make clear to them the signs; then look how they are deluded.
76.
say, "do you worship besides allah that which holds for you 
no [power of] harm or benefit while it is allah who is the 
hearing, the knowing?"
77.
say, "o people of the scripture, do not exceed limits in your 
religion beyond the truth and do not follow the inclinations of 
a people who had gone astray before and misled many and 
have strayed from the soundness of the way."
78.
cursed were those who disbelieved among the children of israel
by the tongue of david and of jesus, the son of mary.  that 
was because they disobeyed and [habitually] transgressed.
79.
they used not to prevent one another from wrongdoing that 
they did.  how wretched was that which they were doing.
80.
you see many of them becoming allies of those who disbelieved
[i.e., the polytheists].  how wretched is that which they have 
put forth for themselves in that allah has become angry with 
them, and in the punishment they will abide eternally.
81.
and if they had believed in allah and the prophet and in what 
was revealed to him, they would not have taken them as allies; 
but many of them are defiantly disobedient.
82.
you will surely find the most intense of the people in animosity
toward the believers [to be] the jews and those who associate 
others with allah; and you will find the nearest of them in 
affection to the believers those who say, "we are christians."  
                                               
247they were in need of sustenance, proving that they were creations of 
allah, not divine beings.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
108
that is because among them are priests and monks and because
they are not arrogant.
83.
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger, 
you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of what they
have recognized of the truth.  they say, "our lord, we have 
believed, so register us among the witnesses.
84.
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come 
to us of the truth?  and we aspire that our lord will admit us 
[to paradise] with the righteous people."
85.
so allah rewarded them for what they said248 with gardens [in 
paradise] beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally.  
and that is the reward of doers of good.
86.
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs – they are the 
companions of hellfire.
87.
o you who have believed, do not prohibit the good things 
which allah has made lawful to you and do not transgress.  
indeed, allah does not like transgressors.
88.
and eat of what allah has provided for you [which is] lawful 
and good.  and fear allah, in whom you are believers.
89.
allah will not impose blame upon you for what is meaningless249
in your oaths, but he will impose blame upon you for [breaking]
what you intended of oaths.  so its expiation250 is the feeding 
of ten needy people from the average of that which you feed 
your [own] families or clothing them or the freeing of a slave.  
but whoever cannot find [or afford it] – then a fast of three days
[is required].  that is the expiation for oaths when you have 
sworn.  but guard your oaths.251  thus does allah make clear 
to you his verses [i.e., revealed law] that you may be grateful.
                                               
248i.e., their admission and acceptance of the truth and commitment to 
allah's religion (islam).
249i.e., what is sworn to only out of habit of speech or what one utters 
carelessly without true intent.
250i.e., that for a deliberate oath.
251i.e., do not take oaths indiscriminately or swear to do that which is sinful, 
requiring expiation.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
109
90.
o you who have believed, indeed, intoxicants, gambling, 
[sacrificing on] stone alters [to other than allah], and divining 
arrows are but defilement from the work of satan, so avoid252
it that you may be successful.
91.
satan only wants to cause between you animosity and hatred 
through intoxicants and gambling and to avert you from the 
remembrance of allah and from prayer.  so will you not desist?
92.
and obey allah and obey the messenger and beware.  and if 
you turn away – then know that upon our messenger is only 
[the responsibility for] clear notification.
93.
there is not upon those who believe and do righteousness 
[any] blame concerning what they have eaten [in the past] if 
they [now] fear allah and believe and do righteous deeds, and 
then fear allah and believe, and then fear allah and do good; 
and allah loves the doers of good.
94.
o you who have believed, allah will surely test you through 
something of the game that your hands and spears [can] reach, 
that allah may make evident those who fear him unseen.  
and whoever transgresses after that – for him is a painful 
punishment.
95.
o you who have believed, do not kill game while you are in the
state of ihram.253  and whoever of you kills it intentionally –
the penalty is an equivalent from sacrificial animals to what 
he killed, as judged by two just men among you as an offering 
[to allah] delivered to the kabah, or an expiation:  the feeding
of needy people or the equivalent of that in fasting, that he 
may taste the consequence of his matter [i.e., deed].  allah has 
pardoned what is past; but whoever returns [to violation], then 
allah will take retribution from him.  and allah is exalted in 
might and owner of retribution.
                                               
252the prohibition understood from the word "avoid" is stronger than if 
allah (subhanahu wa taala) had merely said, "abstain."  the former 
requires distancing oneself from anything remotely related to these practices.
253see footnote to 5:1.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
110
96. lawful to you is game from the sea and its food as provision 
for you and the travelers,254 but forbidden to you is game from 
the land as long as you are in the state of ihram.  and fear 
allah to whom you will be gathered.
97. allah has made the kabah, the sacred house, standing255 for 
the people and [has sanctified] the sacred months and the 
sacrificial animals and the garlands [by which they are identified].  
that is so you may know that allah knows what is in the 
heavens and what is in the earth and that allah is knowing of 
all things.
98. know that allah is severe in penalty and that allah is forgiving 
and merciful.
99. not upon the messenger is [responsibility] except [for] 
notification.  and allah knows whatever you reveal and 
whatever you conceal.
100. say, "not equal are the evil and the good, although the 
abundance of evil might impress you."  so fear allah, o you 
of understanding, that you may be successful.
101. o you who have believed, do not ask about things which, if 
they are shown to you, will distress you.  but if you ask about 
them while the quran is being revealed, they will be shown to 
you.  allah has pardoned it [i.e., that which is past]; and allah 
is forgiving and forbearing.
102. a people asked such [questions] before you; then they became
thereby disbelievers.256
103. allah has not appointed [such innovations as] bahirah or 
saibah or wasilah or ham.257  but those who disbelieve invent 
falsehood about allah, and most of them do not reason.
                                               
254fishing and eating whatever is caught from the sea is permitted even 
during ihram.
255conspicuously as a symbol of allah's religion.
256by their unwillingness to carry out what was commanded of them.
257categories of particular camels which were dedicated to the idols and set 
free to pasture, liberated from the service of man.

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
111
104. and when it is said to them, "come to what allah has 
revealed and to the messenger," they say, "sufficient for us is 
that upon which we found our fathers."  even though their 
fathers knew nothing, nor were they guided?
105. o you who have believed, upon you is [responsibility for]
yourselves.  those who have gone astray will not harm you when
you have been guided.  to allah is your return all together; 
then he will inform you of what you used to do.
106. o you who have believed, testimony [should be taken] among 
you when death approaches one of you at the time of bequest –
[that of] two just men from among you or two others from 
outside if you are traveling through the land and the disaster 
of death should strike you.  detain them after the prayer and 
let them both swear by allah if you doubt [their testimony, 
saying], "we will not exchange it [i.e., our oath] for a price 
[i.e., worldly gain], even if he should be a near relative, and 
we will not withhold the testimony of [i.e., ordained by] allah.  
indeed, we would then be of the sinful."
107. but if it is found that those two were guilty of sin [i.e., perjury],
let two others stand in their place [who are] foremost [in claim]
from those who have a lawful right.  and let them swear by 
allah, "our testimony is truer than their testimony, and we have
not transgressed.  indeed, we would then be of the wrongdoers."
108. that is more likely that they will give testimony according to 
its [true] objective, or [at least] they would fear that [other] 
oaths might be taken after their oaths.  and fear allah and 
listen [i.e., obey him]; and allah does not guide the defiantly 
disobedient people.
109. [be warned of] the day when allah will assemble the 
messengers and say, "what was the response you received?"  
they will say, "we have no knowledge.  indeed, it is you 
who is knower of the unseen" –
110. [the day] when allah will say, "o jesus, son of mary, 
remember my favor upon you and upon your mother when i 
supported you with the pure spirit [i.e., the angel gabriel] 

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
112
and you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity; and 
[remember] when i taught you writing and wisdom and the 
torah and the gospel; and when you designed from clay 
[what was] like the form of a bird with my permission, then 
you breathed into it, and it became a bird with my permission;
and you healed the blind [from birth] and the leper with my 
permission; and when you brought forth the dead with my 
permission; and when i restrained the children of israel from 
[killing] you when you came to them with clear proofs and 
those who disbelieved among them said, "this is not but 
obvious magic."
111. and [remember] when i inspired to the disciples, "believe in 
me and in my messenger [i.e., jesus]."  they said, "we have 
believed, so bear witness that indeed we are muslims [in 
submission to allah]."
112. [and remember] when the disciples said, "o jesus, son of mary,
can your lord258 send down to us a table [spread with food] 
from the heaven?"  [jesus] said, "fear allah, if you should be 
believers."
113. they said, "we wish to eat from it and let our hearts be 
reassured and know that you have been truthful to us and be 
among its witnesses."
114. said jesus, the son of mary, "o allah, our lord, send down 
to us a table [spread with food] from the heaven to be for us a 
festival for the first of us and the last of us and a sign from 
you.  and provide for us, and you are the best of providers."
115. allah said, "indeed, i will send it down to you, but whoever 
disbelieves afterwards from among you – then indeed will i 
punish him with a punishment by which i have not punished 
anyone among the worlds."
116. and [beware the day] when allah will say, "o jesus, son of 
mary, did you say to the people, 'take me and my mother as 
deities besides allah?'"  he will say, "exalted are you!  it 
                                               
258i.e., will allah consent to.  (his ability is undoubted.)

surah 5 – al-maidah
juz 7
113
was not for me to say that to which i have no right.  if i had 
said it, you would have known it.  you know what is within 
myself, and i do not know what is within yourself.  indeed, it 
is you who is knower of the unseen.
117. i said not to them except what you commanded me – to 
worship allah, my lord and your lord.  and i was a witness 
over them as long as i was among them; but when you took 
me up, you were the observer over them, and you are, over 
all things, witness.
118. if you should punish them – indeed they are your servants; 
but if you forgive them – indeed it is you who is the exalted 
in might, the wise."
119. allah will say, "this is the day when the truthful will benefit 
from their truthfulness."  for them are gardens [in paradise] 
beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever, 
allah being pleased with them, and they with him.  that is 
the great attainment.
120. to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth 
and whatever is within them.  and he is over all things 
competent.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
114
surah al-anam
259
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. [all] praise is [due] to allah, who created the heavens and the 
earth and made the darkness and the light.  then those who 
disbelieve equate [others] with their lord.
2. it is he who created you from clay and then decreed a term260 and
a specified time [known] to him;261 then [still] you are in dispute.
3. and he is allah, [the only deity] in the heavens and the earth.  
he knows your secret and what you make public, and he knows 
that which you earn.
4. and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord except 
that they turn away therefrom.
5. for they had denied the truth when it came to them, but there is 
going to reach them the news of what they used to ridicule.262
6. have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before 
them which we had established upon the earth as we have not 
established you?  and we sent [rain from] the sky upon them in 
showers and made rivers flow beneath them; then we destroyed 
them for their sins and brought forth after them a generation of 
others.
7. and even if we had sent down to you, [o muhammad], a 
written scripture on a page and they touched it with their hands, 
the disbelievers would say, "this is not but obvious magic."
8. and they say, "why was there not sent down to him an angel?"263
                                               
259al-anam:  the grazing livestock, specifically:  camels, cattle, sheep and 
goats, as mentioned in verses 143-144 of this surah.
260an appointed time for death.
261for resurrection.
262they will experience the reality of what they had denied and the consequence
of their denial.
263in support of his prophethood ().

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
115
but if we had sent down an angel, the matter would have 
been decided;264 then they would not be reprieved.
9.
and if we had made him [i.e., the messenger] an angel, we 
would have made him [appear as] a man, and we would have 
covered them with that in which they cover themselves [i.e., 
confusion and doubt].
10.
and already were messengers ridiculed before you, but those who
mocked them were enveloped by that which they used to ridicule.
11.
say, "travel through the land; then observe how was the end 
of the deniers."
12.
say, "to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and earth?"  
say, "to allah."  he has decreed upon himself mercy.  he will 
surely assemble you for the day of resurrection, about which 
there is no doubt.  those who will lose themselves [that day] 
do not believe.
13.
and to him belongs that which reposes by night and by day, 
and he is the hearing, the knowing.
14.
say, "is it other than allah i should take as a protector, 
creator of the heavens and earth, while it is he who feeds and 
is not fed?"  say, [o muhammad], "indeed, i have been 
commanded to be the first [among you] who submit [to allah] 
and [was commanded], 'do not ever be of the polytheists.'"
15.
say, "indeed i fear, if i should disobey my lord, the punishment
of a tremendous day."
16.
he from whom it is averted that day – [allah] has granted 
him mercy.  and that is the clear attainment.
17.
and if allah should touch you with adversity, there is no 
remover of it except him.  and if he touches you with good –
then he is over all things competent.
18.
and he is the subjugator over his servants.  and he is the wise,
the acquainted [with all].
                                               
264they would have been destroyed immediately with no chance for repentance.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
116
19.
say, "what thing is greatest in testimony?"  say, "allah is witness
between me and you.  and this quran was revealed to me that 
i may warn you thereby and whomever it reaches.265  do you 
[truly] testify that with allah there are other deities?"  say, "i 
will not testify [with you]."  say, "indeed, he is but one god, 
and indeed, i am free of what you associate [with him]."
20.
those to whom we have given the scripture recognize it266 as 
they recognize their [own] sons.  those who will lose themselves 
[in the hereafter] do not believe.
21.
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie
or denies his verses?  indeed, the wrongdoers will not succeed.
22.
and [mention, o muhammad], the day we will gather them 
all together; then we will say to those who associated others 
with allah, "where are your 'partners' that you used to claim 
[with him]?"
23.
then there will be no [excuse upon] examination except they 
will say, "by allah, our lord, we were not those who associated."
24.
see how they will lie about themselves.  and lost from them 
will be what they used to invent.
25.
and among them are those who listen to you,267 but we have 
placed over their hearts coverings, lest they understand it, and 
in their ears deafness.  and if they should see every sign, they 
will not believe in it.  even when they come to you arguing 
with you, those who disbelieve say, "this is not but legends of 
the former peoples."
26.
and they prevent [others] from him and are [themselves] 
remote from him.  and they do not destroy except themselves, 
but they perceive [it] not.
27.
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the 
fire and will say, "oh, would that we could be returned [to 
                                               
265at every time and place until the day of judgement.
266the quran.  also interpreted as "him," meaning muhammad ().
267when you recite the quran.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
117
life on earth] and not deny the signs of our lord and be among 
the believers."
28.
but what they concealed before has [now] appeared to them.  
and even if they were returned, they would return to that 
which they were forbidden; and indeed, they are liars.
29.
and they say, "there is none but our worldly life, and we will 
not be resurrected."
30.
if you could but see when they will be made to stand before 
their lord.  he will say, "is this not the truth?"  they will say, 
"yes, by our lord."  he will [then] say, "so taste the punishment
for what you used to deny."
31.
those will have lost who deny the meeting with allah, until when
the hour [of resurrection] comes upon them unexpectedly, 
they will say, "oh, [how great is] our regret over what we 
neglected concerning it [i.e., the hour]," while they bear their 
burdens [i.e., sins] on their backs.  unquestionably, evil is that 
which they bear.
32.
and the worldly life is not but amusement and diversion; but 
the home of the hereafter is best for those who fear allah, so 
will you not reason?
33.
we know that you, [o muhammad], are saddened by what 
they say.  and indeed, they do not call you untruthful, but it is 
the verses of allah that the wrongdoers reject.
34.
and certainly were messengers denied before you, but they were
patient over the denial, and they were harmed until our victory
came to them.  and none can alter the words [i.e., decrees] of 
allah.  and there has certainly come to you some information 
about the [previous] messengers.
35.
and if their evasion is difficult for you, then if you are able to 
seek a tunnel into the earth or a stairway into the sky to bring 
them a sign, [then do so].  but if allah had willed, he would 
have united them upon guidance.  so never be of the ignorant.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
118
36.
only those who hear will respond.  but the dead268 – allah 
will resurrect them; then to him they will be returned.
37.
and they say, "why has a sign not been sent down to him from
his lord?"  say, "indeed, allah is able to send down a sign, 
but most of them do not know."
38.
and there is no creature on [or within] the earth or bird that flies
with its wings except [that they are] communities like you.  
we have not neglected in the register269 a thing.  then unto 
their lord they will be gathered.
39.
but those who deny our verses are deaf and dumb within 
darknesses.  whomever allah wills – he leaves astray; and 
whomever he wills – he puts him on a straight path.
40.
say, "have you considered:270  if there came to you the 
punishment of allah or there came to you the hour – is it 
other than allah you would invoke, if you should be truthful?"
41.
no, it is him [alone] you would invoke, and he would remove
that for which you invoked him if he willed, and you would 
forget what you associate [with him].
42.
and we have already sent [messengers] to nations before you, 
[o muhammad]; then we seized them with poverty and hardship 
that perhaps they might humble themselves [to us].
43.
then why, when our punishment came to them, did they not 
humble themselves?  but their hearts became hardened, and 
satan made attractive to them that which they were doing.
44.
so when they forgot that by which they had been reminded,271
we opened to them the doors of every [good] thing until, 
when they rejoiced in that which they were given, we seized 
them suddenly, and they were [then] in despair.
                                               
268i.e., the dead of heart, meaning the disbelievers.
269the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), in which all things are recorded.
270the meaning is understood to be "tell me..."
271i.e., their trial by poverty and hardship or the warnings of their prophets.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
119
45.
so the people that committed wrong were eliminated.  and 
praise to allah, lord of the worlds.
46.
say, "have you considered:272  if allah should take away your 
hearing and your sight and set a seal upon your hearts, which 
deity other than allah could bring them [back] to you?"  look 
how we diversify273 the verses; then they [still] turn away.
47.
say, "have you considered:  if the punishment of allah should
come to you unexpectedly or manifestly,274 will any be destroyed 
but the wrongdoing people?"
48.
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good 
tidings and warners.  so whoever believes and reforms – there 
will be no fear concerning them, nor will they grieve.
49.
but those who deny our verses – the punishment will touch275
them for their defiant disobedience.
50.
say, [o muhammad], "i do not tell you that i have the 
depositories [containing the provision] of allah or that i know 
the unseen, nor do i tell you that i am an angel.  i only follow 
what is revealed to me."  say, "is the blind equivalent to the 
seeing?  then will you not give thought?"
51.
and warn by it [i.e., the quran] those who fear that they will be 
gathered before their lord – for them besides him will be no
protector and no intercessor – that they might become righteous.
52.
and do not send away those who call upon their lord morning
and afternoon, seeking his countenance.  not upon you is 
anything of their account and not upon them is anything of 
your account.276  so were you to send them away, you would 
[then] be of the wrongdoers.
                                               
272see footnote to verse 40.
273repeat in various ways for emphasis and clarification.
274i.e., before your eyes.
275i.e., reach and afflict.
276no one is held accountable for the deeds or intentions of another.  that is 
left to allah's judgement.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
120
53.
and thus we have tried some of them through others that they 
[i.e., the disbelievers] might say, "is it these whom allah has 
favored among us?"  is not allah most knowing of those who 
are grateful?277
54.
and when those come to you who believe in our verses, say, 
"peace be upon you.  your lord has decreed upon himself mercy:  
that any of you who does wrong out of ignorance and then 
repents after that and corrects himself – indeed, he is 
forgiving and merciful."
55.
and thus do we detail the verses, and [thus] the way of the 
criminals will become evident.
56.
say, "indeed, i have been forbidden to worship those you 
invoke besides allah."  say, "i will not follow your desires, 
for i would then have gone astray, and i would not be of the 
[rightly] guided."
57.
say, "indeed, i am on clear evidence from my lord, and you 
have denied it.  i do not have that for which you are impatient.278  
the decision is only for allah.  he relates the truth, and he is 
the best of deciders."
58.
say, "if i had that for which you are impatient, the matter 
would have been decided between me and you, but allah is 
most knowing of the wrongdoers."
59.
and with him are the keys of the unseen; none knows them
except him.  and he knows what is on the land and in the sea.  
not a leaf falls but that he knows it.  and no grain is there 
within the darknesses of the earth and no moist or dry [thing] 
but that it is [written] in a clear record.
                                               
277those referred to in verses 52-54 are the poor muslims who were sincere 
believers and students of the prophet ().  the influential leaders of 
quraysh had disdained to sit with them, saying to prophet muhammad (), 
"perhaps if you evicted them, we would follow you."
278the disbelievers would challenge the prophet (), telling him to bring 
on allah's punishment if he should be truthful in his warning.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
121
60.
and it is he who takes your souls by night279 and knows what 
you have committed by day.  then he revives you therein 
[i.e., by day] that a specified term280 may be fulfilled.  then to 
him will be your return; then he will inform you about what 
you used to do.
61.
and he is the subjugator over his servants, and he sends over 
you guardian-angels until, when death comes to one of you, 
our messengers [i.e., angels of death] take him, and they do 
not fail [in their duties].
62.
then they [i.e., his servants] are returned to allah, their true lord.  
unquestionably, his is the judgement, and he is the swiftest 
of accountants.
63.
say, "who rescues you from the darknesses of the land and sea
[when] you call upon him imploring [aloud] and privately, 'if 
he should save us from this [crisis], we will surely be among 
the thankful.'"
64.
say, "it is allah who saves you from it and from every distress;
then you [still] associate others with him."
65.
say, "he is the [one] able to send upon you affliction from above 
you or from beneath your feet or to confuse you [so you become] 
sects281 and make you taste the violence of one another."  
look how we diversify the signs that they might understand.
66.
but your people have denied it while it is the truth.  say, "i am 
not over you a manager [i.e., authority]."
67.
for every news [i.e., happening] is a finality;282 and you are 
going to know.
68.
and when you see those who engage in [offensive] discourse283
concerning our verses, then turn away from them until they 
                                               
279i.e., when you sleep.
280one's decreed life span.
281following your own inclinations rather than the truth, biased and hostile 
toward each other.
282other shades of meaning include "a permanence," "a realization" and "a 
time of stability."
283i.e., denials or mockery.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
122
enter into another conversation.  and if satan should cause 
you to forget, then do not remain after the reminder with the 
wrongdoing people.
69.
and those who fear allah are not held accountable for them 
[i.e., the disbelievers] at all, but [only for] a reminder – that 
perhaps they will fear him.
70.
and leave those who take their religion as amusement and 
diversion and whom the worldly life has deluded.  but remind 
with it [i.e., the quran], lest a soul be given up to destruction 
for what it earned; it will have other than allah no protector 
and no intercessor.  and if it should offer every compensation, 
it would not be taken from it [i.e., that soul].  those are the 
ones who are given to destruction for what they have earned.  
for them will be a drink of scalding water and a painful 
punishment because they used to disbelieve.
71.
say, "shall we invoke instead of allah that which neither 
benefits us nor harms us and be turned back on our heels after 
allah has guided us?  [we would then be] like one whom the 
devils enticed [to wander] upon the earth confused, [while] he 
has companions inviting him to guidance, [calling], 'come to 
us.'"284  say, "indeed, the guidance of allah is the [only] 
guidance; and we have been commanded to submit to the 
lord of the worlds
72.
and to establish prayer and fear him."  and it is he to whom 
you will be gathered.
73.
and it is he who created the heavens and earth in truth.  and 
the day [i.e., whenever] he says, "be," and it is, his word is 
the truth.285 and his is the dominion [on] the day the horn is 
                                               
284the example given is of one who has lost his way and is further confused 
by the evil ones who tempt him to follow various directions, all leading to 
destruction.  although his sincere friends call him back to the right path, 
he ignores them.
285when interpreted as the "day" (of resurrection), the sentence would read:  
"and the day he says, 'be,' and it is, his word will be the truth."

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
123
blown.  [he is] knower of the unseen286 and the witnessed;287
and he is the wise, the acquainted.
74.
and [mention, o muhammad], when ibrahim said to his 
father zar, "do you take idols as deities?  indeed, i see you 
and your people to be in manifest error."
75.
and thus did we show ibrahim the realm of the heavens and 
the earth that he would be among the certain [in faith].
76.
so when the night covered him [with darkness], he saw a star.  
he said, "this is my lord."288  but when it set, he said, "i like 
not those that set [i.e., disappear]."
77.
and when he saw the moon rising, he said, "this is my lord."  
but when it set, he said, "unless my lord guides me, i will 
surely be among the people gone astray."
78.
and when he saw the sun rising, he said, "this is my lord; this 
is greater."  but when it set, he said, "o my people, indeed i 
am free from what you associate with allah.
79.
indeed, i have turned my face [i.e., self] toward he who created
the heavens and the earth, inclining toward truth, and i am not 
of those who associate others with allah."
80.
and his people argued with him.  he said, "do you argue with 
me concerning allah while he has guided me?  and i fear not 
what you associate with him [and will not be harmed] unless 
my lord should will something.  my lord encompasses all 
things in knowledge; then will you not remember?
81.
and how should i fear what you associate while you do not 
                                               
286that which is absent, invisible, or beyond the perception of the senses or 
of the mind and therefore is unknown to man, except for what allah 
chooses to reveal.
287what is present, visible and known to man.  the knowledge of allah 
(subhanahu wa taala) includes the reality of all things and all occurrences,
no matter how they might appear to human beings.
288in verses 76-79, beginning from the people's own assertions, ibrahim 
presents a picture of his dissatisfaction as the only logical conclusion one could
reach, in order to show them the futility of their false objects of worship.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
124
fear that you have associated with allah that for which he has 
not sent down to you any authority?  so which of the two 
parties has more right to security, if you should know?"
82.
they who believe and do not mix their belief with injustice289 –
those will have security, and they are [rightly] guided.
83.
and that was our [conclusive] argument which we gave
ibrahim against his people.  we raise by degrees whom we will.  
indeed, your lord is wise and knowing.
84.
and we gave to him [i.e., ibrahim] isaac and jacob – all [of 
them] we guided.  and noah, we guided before; and among 
his descendants, david and solomon and job and joseph and 
moses and aaron.  thus do we reward the doers of good.
85.
and zechariah and john and jesus and elias – and all were of 
the righteous.
86.
and ishmael and elisha and jonah and lot – and all [of them] 
we preferred over the worlds.
87.
and [some] among their fathers and their descendants and 
their brothers – and we chose them and we guided them to a 
straight path.
88.
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever 
he wills of his servants.  but if they had associated others 
with allah, then worthless for them would be whatever they 
were doing.
89.
those are the ones to whom we gave the scripture and 
authority and prophethood.  but if they [i.e., the disbelievers] 
deny it, then we have entrusted it to a people who are not 
therein disbelievers.
90.
those are the ones whom allah has guided, so from their 
guidance take an example.  say, "i ask of you for it [i.e., this 
message] no payment.  it is not but a reminder for the worlds."
                                               
289specifically, the association of others in divinity with allah.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
125
91.
and they did not appraise allah with true appraisal290 when 
they said, "allah did not reveal to a human being anything."  
say, "who revealed the scripture that moses brought as light 
and guidance to the people?  you [jews] make it into pages, 
disclosing [some of] it and concealing much.  and you291 were 
taught that which you knew not – neither you nor your fathers."  
say, "allah [revealed it]."  then leave them in their [empty] 
discourse, amusing themselves.
92.
and this is a book which we have sent down, blessed and 
confirming what was before it, that you may warn the mother 
of cities [i.e., makkah] and those around it.292  those who 
believe in the hereafter believe in it, and they are maintaining 
their prayers.
93.
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie about 
allah or says, "it has been inspired to me," while nothing has 
been inspired to him, and one who says, "i will reveal 
[something] like what allah revealed."  and if you could but 
see when the wrongdoers are in the overwhelming pangs of 
death while the angels extend their hands,293
[saying], 
"discharge your souls!  today you will be awarded the 
punishment of [extreme] humiliation for what you used to say 
against allah other than the truth and [that] you were, toward 
his verses, being arrogant."
94.
[it will be said to them], "and you have certainly come to us 
alone [i.e., individually] as we created you the first time, and 
you have left whatever we bestowed upon you behind you.  
and we do not see with you your 'intercessors' which you 
claimed that they were among you associates [of allah].  it 
has [all] been severed between you,294 and lost from you is 
what you used to claim."
                                               
290i.e., they did not appreciate the extent of his ability and wisdom.
291the jews, or it may refer to the believers, who are taught by the quran.
292i.e., all other peoples.
293striking them, as they are unwilling to give up their souls for judgement.
294between yourselves and the claimed associates and intercessors.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
126
95. indeed, allah is the cleaver of grain and date seeds.295  he 
brings the living out of the dead and brings the dead out of the 
living.  that is allah; so how are you deluded?
96. [he is] the cleaver of daybreak and has made the night for rest 
and the sun and moon for calculation.296  that is the determination
of the exalted in might, the knowing.
97. and it is he who placed for you the stars that you may be 
guided by them through the darknesses of the land and sea.  
we have detailed the signs for a people who know.
98. and it is he who produced you from one soul and [gave you] 
a place of dwelling and of storage.297  we have detailed the 
signs for a people who understand.
99. and it is he who sends down rain from the sky, and we 
produce thereby the growth of all things.  we produce from it 
greenery from which we produce grains arranged in layers.  
and from the palm trees – of its emerging fruit are clusters 
hanging low.  and [we produce] gardens of grapevines and 
olives and pomegranates, similar yet varied.  look at [each of] 
its fruit when it yields and [at] its ripening.  indeed in that are 
signs for a people who believe.
100. but they have attributed to allah partners – the jinn, while he 
has created them – and have fabricated for him sons and 
daughters.  exalted is he and high above what they describe.
101. [he is] originator of the heavens and the earth.  how could 
he have a son when he does not have a companion [i.e., wife] 
and he created all things?  and he is, of all things, knowing.
102. that is allah, your lord; there is no deity except him, the 
creator of all things, so worship him.  and he is disposer of 
all things.
                                               
295he (subhanahu wa taala) causes them to split and sprout.
296or "according to calculation," referring to their precise movement.
297in the earth.  see 77:25-26.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 7
127
103. vision perceives him not,298 but he perceives [all] vision; and 
he is the subtle, the acquainted.
104. there has come to you enlightenment from your lord.  so 
whoever will see does so for [the benefit of] his soul, and 
whoever is blind [does harm] against it.  and [say], "i am not 
a guardian over you."299
105. and thus do we diversify the verses so they [i.e., the 
disbelievers] will say, "you have studied,"300 and so we may 
make it [i.e., the quran] clear for a people who know.
106. follow, [o muhammad], what has been revealed to you from 
your lord – there is no deity except him – and turn away 
from those who associate others with allah.
107. but if allah had willed, they would not have associated.  and 
we have not appointed you over them as a guardian, nor are 
you a manager over them.301
108. and do not insult those they invoke other than allah, lest they 
insult allah in enmity without knowledge.  thus we have 
made pleasing to every community their deeds.  then to their 
lord is their return, and he will inform them about what they 
used to do.
109. and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if a sign
came to them, they would surely believe in it.  say, "the signs 
are only with [i.e., from] allah."  and what will make you
perceive that even if it [i.e., a sign] came, they would not believe.
110. and we will turn away their hearts and their eyes just as they 
refused to believe in it [i.e., the revelation] the first time.  and
we will leave them in their transgression, wandering blindly.
                                               
298in the life of this world.  the people of paradise will be able to see allah 
in the hereafter.  see 75:22-23.
299the prophet () is directed to disassociate himself from all erroneous 
belief and practice.
300accusing the prophet () of having learned from the jews and christians.
301the prophet's duty did not go beyond delivery of the message.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
128
111. and even if we had sent down to them the angels [with the 
message] and the dead spoke to them [of it] and we gathered 
together every [created] thing in front of them, they would not 
believe unless allah should will.  but most of them, [of that],
are ignorant.
112. and thus we have made for every prophet an enemy – devils 
from mankind and jinn, inspiring to one another decorative 
speech in delusion.  but if your lord had willed, they would 
not have done it, so leave them and that which they invent.
113. and [it is] so the hearts of those who disbelieve in the hereafter
will incline toward it [i.e., deceptive speech] and that they will
be satisfied with it and that they will commit that which they 
are committing.
114. [say], "then is it other than allah i should seek as judge while
it is he who has revealed to you the book [i.e., the quran] 
explained in detail?"  and those to whom we [previously] 
gave the scripture know that it is sent down from your lord in 
truth, so never be among the doubters.
115. and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and in 
justice.  none can alter his words, and he is the hearing, the 
knowing.
116. and if you obey most of those upon the earth, they will mislead
you from the way of allah.  they follow not except assumption,
and they are not but falsifying.302
117. indeed, your lord is most knowing of who strays from his way,
and he is most knowing of the [rightly] guided.
118. so eat of that [meat] upon which the name of allah has been 
mentioned,303 if you are believers in his verses [i.e., revealed 
law].
119. and why should you not eat of that upon which the name of 
allah has been mentioned while he has explained in detail to 
                                               
302out of ignorance, conjecture and supposition.
303at the time of slaughter.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
129
you what he has forbidden you, excepting that to which you 
are compelled.304  and indeed do many lead [others] astray 
through their [own] inclinations without knowledge.  indeed, 
your lord – he is most knowing of the transgressors.
120. and leave [i.e., desist from] what is apparent of sin and what 
is concealed thereof.  indeed, those who earn [blame for] sin 
will be recompensed for that which they used to commit.
121. and do not eat of that upon which the name of allah has not 
been mentioned, for indeed, it is grave disobedience.  and 
indeed do the devils inspire their allies [among men] to 
dispute with you.  and if you were to obey them, indeed, you 
would be associators [of others with him].305
122. and is one who was dead and we gave him life and made for 
him light by which to walk among the people like one who is
in darkness, never to emerge therefrom?  thus it has been 
made pleasing to the disbelievers that which they were doing.
123. and thus we have placed within every city the greatest of its 
criminals to conspire therein.  but they conspire not except 
against themselves, and they perceive [it] not.
124. and when a sign comes to them, they say, "never will we 
believe until we are given like that which was given to the 
messengers of allah."  allah is most knowing of where [i.e., 
with whom] he places his message.  there will afflict those 
who committed crimes debasement before allah and severe 
punishment for what they used to conspire.
125. so whoever allah wants to guide – he expands his breast to 
[contain] islam; and whoever he wants to misguide306 – he 
makes his breast tight and constricted as though he were climbing
into the sky.  thus does allah place defilement upon those 
who do not believe.
                                               
304in cases of dire necessity, what is normally prohibited becomes permissible,
but only to the extent of the need.
305i.e., by your obedience to them – obedience being the basis of worship.
306as a result of the person's arrogance and persistence in sin.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
130
126. and this is the path of your lord, [leading] straight.  we have 
detailed the verses for a people who remember.
127. for them will be the home of peace [i.e., paradise] with their 
lord.  and he will be their protecting friend because of what 
they used to do.
128. and [mention, o muhammad], the day when he will gather 
them together [and say], "o company of jinn, you have 
[misled] many of mankind."  and their allies among mankind 
will say, "our lord, some of us made use of others, and we 
have [now] reached our term which you appointed for us."  
he will say, "the fire is your residence, wherein you will 
abide eternally, except for what allah wills.  indeed, your 
lord is wise and knowing."
129. and thus will we make some of the wrongdoers allies of 
others for what they used to earn.307
130. "o company of jinn and mankind,308 did there not come to you 
messengers from among you, relating to you my verses and 
warning you of the meeting of this day of yours?"  they will 
say, "we bear witness against ourselves"; and the worldly life 
had deluded them, and they will bear witness against themselves
that they were disbelievers.
131. that is because your lord would not destroy the cities for 
wrongdoing309 while their people were unaware.
132. and for all are degrees [i.e., positions resulting] from what they 
have done.  and your lord is not unaware of what they do.
133. and your lord is the free of need, the possessor of mercy.  if 
he wills, he can do away with you and give succession after 
you to whomever he wills, just as he produced you from the 
descendants of another people.
                                               
307another interpretation pertaining to this world is "and thus do we make 
some of the wrongdoers allies of others for what they have been earning."
308they will be reproached thus at the judgement.
309or "unjustly."

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
131
134. indeed, what you are promised is coming, and you will not 
cause failure [to allah].310
135. say, "o my people, work according to your position; [for] 
indeed, i am working.  and you are going to know who will 
have succession in the home.311  indeed, the wrongdoers will 
not succeed."
136. and they [i.e., the polytheists] assign to allah from that which 
he created of crops and livestock a share and say, "this is 
for allah," by their claim, "and this is for our 'partners'
[associated with him]."  but what is for their "partners" does 
not reach allah, while what is for allah – this reaches their 
"partners."  evil is that which they rule.
137. and likewise, to many of the polytheists their partners312 have 
made [to seem] pleasing the killing of their children in order to
bring about their destruction and to cover them with confusion
in their religion.  and if allah had willed, they would not 
have done so.  so leave them and that which they invent.
138. and they say, "these animals313 and crops are forbidden; no 
one may eat from them except whom we will," by their claim.  
and there are those [camels] whose backs are forbidden [by 
them]314 and those upon which the name of allah is not 
mentioned315 – [all of this] an invention of untruth about 
him.316  he will punish them for what they were inventing.
139. and they say, "what is in the bellies of these animals317 is 
exclusively for our males and forbidden to our females.  but if 
it is [born] dead, then all of them have shares therein."  he 
                                               
310i.e., you will neither escape nor prevent its occurrence.
311i.e., in the land or in the hereafter.
312their evil associates.
313the four categories of grazing livestock called "anam" collectively.
314see 5:103.
315at the time of slaughter.  rather, they are dedicated to others among their 
"deities."
316i.e., false assertions that such practices are part of allah's religion.
317i.e., their milk and offspring.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
132
will punish them for their description.318  indeed, he is wise 
and knowing.
140. those will have lost who killed their children in foolishness 
without knowledge and prohibited what allah had provided 
for them, inventing untruth about allah.  they have gone 
astray and were not [rightly] guided.
141. and he it is who causes gardens to grow, [both] trellised and 
untrellised, and palm trees and crops of different [kinds of] 
food and olives and pomegranates, similar and dissimilar.  eat 
of [each of] its fruit when it yields and give its due [zakah] on 
the day of its harvest.  and be not excessive.319  indeed, he 
does not like those who commit excess.
142. and of the grazing livestock are carriers [of burdens] and 
those [too] small.  eat of what allah has provided for you 
and do not follow the footsteps of satan.320  indeed, he is to 
you a clear enemy.
143. [they are] eight mates – of the sheep, two and of the goats, 
two.  say, "is it the two males he has forbidden or the two 
females or that which the wombs of the two females contain?  
inform me with knowledge, if you should be truthful."
144. and of the camels, two and of the cattle, two.  say, "is it the 
two males he has forbidden or the two females or that which 
the wombs of the two females contain?  or were you 
witnesses when allah charged you with this?  then who is 
more unjust than one who invents a lie about allah to mislead 
the people by [something] other than knowledge?  indeed, 
allah does not guide the wrongdoing people."
145. say, "i do not find within that which was revealed to me 
[anything] forbidden to one who would eat it unless it be a 
dead animal or blood spilled out or the flesh of swine – for
                                               
318of what is lawful and unlawful according to their whims.
319in eating, as well as in all things generally.
320as the disbelievers have done in making their own rulings about what is 
permissible and what is prohibited.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
133
indeed, it is impure – or it be [that slaughtered in] disobedience,
dedicated to other than allah.321  but whoever is forced [by 
necessity], neither desiring [it] nor transgressing [its limit], 
then indeed, your lord is forgiving and merciful."
146. and to those who are jews we prohibited every animal of 
uncloven hoof; and of the cattle and the sheep we prohibited 
to them their fat, except what adheres to their backs or the 
entrails or what is joined with bone.  [by] that we repaid them 
for their injustice.  and indeed, we are truthful.
147. so if they deny you, [o muhammad], say, "your lord is the 
possessor of vast mercy; but his punishment cannot be repelled
from the people who are criminals."
148. those who associated with allah will say, "if allah had 
willed, we would not have associated [anything] and neither 
would our fathers, nor would we have prohibited anything."  
likewise did those before deny until they tasted our punishment.  
say, "do you have any knowledge that you can produce for 
us?  you follow not except assumption, and you are not but 
falsifying."
149. say, "with allah is the far-reaching [i.e., conclusive] argument.  
if he had willed, he would have guided you all."
150. say, [o muhammad], "bring forward your witnesses who will 
testify that allah has prohibited this."  and if they testify, do
not testify with them.  and do not follow the desires of those 
who deny our verses and those who do not believe in the 
hereafter, while they equate [others] with their lord.
151. say, "come, i will recite what your lord has prohibited to 
you.  [he commands] that you not associate anything with 
him, and to parents, good treatment, and do not kill your 
children out of poverty; we will provide for you and them.  
and do not approach immoralities – what is apparent of them 
and what is concealed.  and do not kill the soul which allah 
                                               
321refer to 2:173 and 5:3.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
134
has forbidden [to be killed] except by [legal] right.  this has 
he instructed you that you may use reason."
152. and do not approach the orphan's property except in a way 
that is best [i.e., intending improvement] until he reaches 
maturity.  and give full measure and weight in justice.  we do 
not charge any soul except [with that within] its capacity.  
and when you speak [i.e., testify], be just, even if [it concerns]
a near relative.  and the covenant of allah fulfill.  this has he 
instructed you that you may remember.
153. and, [moreover], this is my path, which is straight, so follow it;
and do not follow [other] ways, for you will be separated from
his way.  this has he instructed you that you may become 
righteous.
154. then322 we gave moses the scripture, making complete [our 
favor] upon the one who did good [i.e., moses] and as a 
detailed explanation of all things and as guidance and mercy 
that perhaps in the meeting with their lord they would believe.
155. and this [quran] is a book we have revealed [which is] blessed, 
so follow it and fear allah that you may receive mercy.
156. [we revealed it] lest you say, "the scripture was only sent down 
to two groups before us, but we were of their study unaware,"
157. or lest you say, "if only the scripture had been revealed to us, 
we would have been better guided than they."  so there has 
[now] come to you a clear evidence from your lord and a 
guidance and mercy.  then who is more unjust than one who 
denies the verses of allah and turns away from them?  we 
will recompense those who turn away from our verses with 
the worst of punishment for their having turned away.
158. do they [then] wait for anything except that the angels should 
come to them or your lord should come or that there come 
some of the signs323 of your lord?  the day that some of the 
                                               
322meaning "additionally" or "moreover," not denoting time sequence.
323those denoting the approach of the last hour.

surah 6 – al-anam
juz 8
135
signs of your lord will come no soul will benefit from its 
faith as long as it had not believed before or had earned
through its faith some good.  say, "wait.  indeed, we [also] 
are waiting."
159. indeed, those who have divided their religion and become 
sects – you, [o muhammad], are not [associated] with them in 
anything.  their affair is only [left] to allah; then he will 
inform them about what they used to do.
160. whoever comes [on the day of judgement] with a good deed 
will have ten times the like thereof [to his credit], and 
whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed 
except the like thereof; and they will not be wronged.324
161. say, "indeed, my lord has guided me to a straight path – a 
correct religion – the way of ibrahim, inclining toward truth.  
and he was not among those who associated others with allah."
162. say, "indeed, my prayer, my rites of sacrifice, my living and 
my dying are for allah, lord of the worlds.
163. no partner has he.  and this i have been commanded, and i 
am the first [among you] of the muslims."325
164. say, "is it other than allah i should desire as a lord while he 
is the lord of all things?  and every soul earns not [blame] 
except against itself, and no bearer of burdens will bear the 
burden of another.  then to your lord is your return, and he 
will inform you concerning that over which you used to differ."
165. and it is he who has made you successors upon the earth and 
has raised some of you above others in degrees [of rank] that 
he may try you through what he has given you.  indeed, your 
lord is swift in penalty; but indeed, he is forgiving and 
merciful.
                                               
324i.e., treated unjustly.
325i.e., those who submit to the will of allah.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
136
surah al-araf
326
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
alif, lam, meem, saad.327
2.
[this is] a book revealed to you, [o muhammad] – so let 
there not be in your breast distress therefrom – that you may 
warn thereby and as a reminder to the believers.
3.
follow, [o mankind], what has been revealed to you from 
your lord and do not follow other than him any allies.  little 
do you remember.
4.
and how many cities have we destroyed, and our punishment
came to them at night or while they were sleeping at noon.
5.
and their declaration when our punishment came to them was 
only that they said, "indeed, we were wrongdoers!"
6.
then we will surely question those to whom [a message] was 
sent, and we will surely question the messengers.
7.
then we will surely relate [their deeds] to them with knowledge,
and we were not [at all] absent.
8.
and the weighing [of deeds] that day will be the truth.  so those 
whose scales are heavy – it is they who will be the successful.
9.
and those whose scales are light – they are the ones who will lose 
themselves for what injustice they were doing toward our verses.
10.
and we have certainly established you upon the earth and made
for you therein ways of livelihood.  little are you grateful.
11.
and we have certainly created you, [o mankind], and given 
you [human] form.  then we said to the angels, "prostrate to 
adam"; so they prostrated, except for iblees.328  he was not of 
those who prostrated.
                                               
326al-araf:  the elevations, referring to the partition between paradise and hell.
327see footnote to 2:1.
328satan.  see footnote to 2:34.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
137
12.
[allah] said, "what prevented you from prostrating when i 
commanded you?"  [satan] said, "i am better than him.  you 
created me from fire and created him from clay [i.e., earth]."
13.
[allah] said, "descend from it [i.e., paradise], for it is not for 
you to be arrogant therein.  so get out; indeed, you are of the 
debased."
14.
[satan] said, "reprieve me until the day they are resurrected."
15.
[allah] said, "indeed, you are of those reprieved."
16.
[satan] said, "because you have put me in error, i will surely 
sit in wait for them [i.e., mankind] on your straight path.
17.
then i will come to them from before them and from behind 
them and on their right and on their left, and you will not find 
most of them grateful [to you]."
18.
[allah] said, "depart from it [i.e., paradise], reproached and 
expelled.  whoever follows you among them – i will surely 
fill hell with you, all together."
19.
and "o adam, dwell, you and your wife, in paradise and eat 
from wherever you will but do not approach this tree, lest you 
be among the wrongdoers."
20.
but satan whispered to them to make apparent to them that
which was concealed from them of their private parts.  he said,
"your lord did not forbid you this tree except that you become
angels or become of the immortal."
21.
and he swore [by allah] to them, "indeed, i am to you from 
among the sincere advisors."
22.
so he made them fall, through deception.  and when they tasted
of the tree, their private parts became apparent to them, and 
they began to fasten together over themselves from the leaves 
of paradise.  and their lord called to them, "did i not forbid 
you from that tree and tell you that satan is to you a clear enemy?"
23.
they said, "our lord, we have wronged ourselves, and if you 
do not forgive us and have mercy upon us, we will surely be 
among the losers."

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
138
24.
[allah] said, "descend, being to one another enemies.  and 
for you on the earth is a place of settlement and enjoyment 
[i.e., provision] for a time."
25.
he said, "therein you will live, and therein you will die, and 
from it you will be brought forth."
26.
o children of adam, we have bestowed upon you clothing to 
conceal your private parts and as adornment.  but the clothing 
of righteousness – that is best.  that is from the signs of allah 
that perhaps they will remember.
27.
o children of adam, let not satan tempt you as he removed 
your parents from paradise, stripping them of their clothing329
to show them their private parts.  indeed, he sees you, he and 
his tribe, from where you do not see them.  indeed, we have 
made the devils allies to those who do not believe.
28.
and when they commit an immorality, they say, "we found 
our fathers doing it, and allah has ordered us to do it."  say, 
"indeed, allah does not order immorality.  do you say about 
allah that which you do not know?"
29.
say, [o muhammad], "my lord has ordered justice and that 
you direct yourselves [to the qiblah] at every place [or time] 
of prostration, and invoke him, sincere to him in religion."  
just as he originated you, you will return [to life] –
30.
a group [of you] he guided, and a group deserved [to be in]
error.  indeed, they [i.e., the latter] had taken the devils as allies 
instead of allah while they thought that they were guided.
31.
o children of adam, take your adornment [i.e., wear your 
clothing] at every masjid,330 and eat and drink, but be not 
excessive.  indeed, he likes not those who commit excess.
32.
say, "who has forbidden the adornment of [i.e., from] allah 
which he has produced for his servants and the good [lawful] 
                                               
329the garments of paradise.
330literally, "place of prostration," meaning any place that a muslim prays 
upon the earth.  the term may also refer specifically to a mosque.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
139
things of provision?"  say, "they are for those who believe 
during worldly life [but] exclusively for them on the day of 
resurrection." thus do we detail the verses for a people who 
know.
33.
say, "my lord has only forbidden immoralities – what is apparent
of them and what is concealed – and sin,331 and oppression 
without right, and that you associate with allah that for which 
he has not sent down authority, and that you say about allah 
that which you do not know."
34.
and for every nation is a [specified] term.  so when their time 
has come, they will not remain behind an hour, nor will they 
precede [it].
35.
o children of adam, if there come to you messengers from
among you relating to you my verses [i.e., scriptures and laws],
then whoever fears allah and reforms – there will be no fear 
concerning them, nor will they grieve.
36.
but the ones who deny our verses and are arrogant toward 
them – those are the companions of the fire; they will abide 
therein eternally.
37.
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a 
lie or denies his verses?  those will attain their portion of the 
decree332 until, when our messengers [i.e., angels] come to 
them to take them in death, they will say, "where are those 
you used to invoke besides allah?"  they will say, "they have 
departed from us," and will bear witness against themselves 
that they were disbelievers.
38.
[allah] will say, "enter among nations which had passed on 
before you of jinn and mankind into the fire."  every time a 
nation enters, it will curse its sister333 until, when they have all 
overtaken one another therein, the last of them334 will say 
                                               
331any unlawful deed.
332what is decreed for them.
333the nation preceding it.
334the followers of evil leaders.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
140
about the first of them,335 "our lord, these had misled us, so 
give them a double punishment of the fire."  he will say, "for 
each is double, but you do not know."
39.
and the first of them will say to the last of them, "then you 
had not any favor over us, so taste the punishment for what 
you used to earn."
40.
indeed, those who deny our verses and are arrogant toward 
them – the gates of heaven will not be opened for them, nor 
will they enter paradise until a camel enters into the eye of a 
needle [i.e., never].  and thus do we recompense the criminals.
41.
they will have from hell a bed and over them coverings [of 
fire].  and thus do we recompense the wrongdoers.
42.
but those who believed and did righteous deeds – we charge 
no soul except [within] its capacity.  those are the companions 
of paradise; they will abide therein eternally.
43.
and we will have removed whatever is within their breasts of 
resentment,336 [while] flowing beneath them are rivers.  and 
they will say, "praise to allah, who has guided us to this; and 
we would never have been guided if allah had not guided us.  
certainly the messengers of our lord had come with the truth."  
and they will be called, "this is paradise, which you have 
been made to inherit for what you used to do."
44.
and the companions of paradise will call out to the companions 
of the fire, "we have already found what our lord promised 
us to be true.  have you found what your lord promised to be 
true?"  they will say, "yes."  then an announcer will announce
among them, "the curse of allah shall be upon the wrongdoers
45.
who averted [people] from the way of allah and sought to make 
it [seem] deviant while they were, concerning the hereafter,
disbelievers."
                                               
335their leaders.
336i.e., ill will or sense of injury for what was inflicted upon them during 
worldly life.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
141
46.
and between them will be a partition [i.e., wall], and on [its] 
elevations are men337 who recognize all338 by their mark. and 
they call out to the companions of paradise, "peace be upon you."  
they have not [yet] entered it, but they long intensely.
47.
and when their eyes are turned toward the companions of the
fire, they say, "our lord, do not place us with the wrongdoing
people."
48.
and the companions of the elevations will call to men [within 
hell] whom they recognize by their mark, saying, "of no avail to 
you was your gathering339 and [the fact] that you were arrogant."
49.
[allah will say], "are these340 the ones whom you [inhabitants 
of hell] swore that allah would never offer them mercy?  enter
paradise, [o people of the elevations].  no fear will there be 
concerning you, nor will you grieve."
50.
and the companions of the fire will call to the companions of 
paradise, "pour upon us some water or from whatever allah has
provided you."  they will say, "indeed, allah has forbidden 
them both to the disbelievers
51.
who took their religion as distraction and amusement and 
whom the worldly life deluded."  so today we will forget
them just as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs and 
for having rejected our verses.
52.
and we had certainly brought them a book which we detailed
by knowledge – as guidance and mercy to a people who believe.
53.
do they await except its result?341  the day its result comes 
those who had ignored it before will say, "the messengers of 
our lord had come with the truth, so are there [now] any 
intercessors to intercede for us or could we be sent back to do 
                                               
337those whose scales are balanced between good and evil deeds.
338both the inhabitants of paradise and those of hell.
339i.e., great numbers or gathering of wealth.
340the humble believers who are now in paradise.  another interpretation 
regards them as the people on the elevated partition.
341the fulfillment of what is promised in the quran.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
142
other than what we used to do?"  they will have lost themselves,
and lost from them is what they used to invent.
54.
indeed, your lord is allah, who created the heavens and earth 
in six days and then established himself above the throne.342  
he covers the night with the day, [another night] chasing it 
rapidly; and [he created] the sun, the moon, and the stars, 
subjected by his command.  unquestionably, his is the creation
and the command; blessed is allah, lord of the worlds.
55.
call upon your lord in humility and privately; indeed, he 
does not like transgressors.343
56.
and cause not corruption upon the earth after its reformation.  
and invoke him in fear and aspiration.  indeed, the mercy of 
allah is near to the doers of good.
57.
and it is he who sends the winds as good tidings before his 
mercy [i.e., rainfall] until, when they have carried heavy 
rainclouds, we drive them to a dead land and we send down 
rain therein and bring forth thereby [some] of all the fruits.  
thus will we bring forth the dead; perhaps you may be reminded.
58.
and the good land – its vegetation emerges by permission of its 
lord; but that which is bad – nothing emerges except sparsely,
with difficulty.  thus do we diversify the signs for a people 
who are grateful.
59.
we had certainly sent noah to his people, and he said, "o my 
people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  
indeed, i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day."
60.
said the eminent among his people, "indeed, we see you in 
clear error."
61.
[noah] said, "o my people, there is not error in me, but i am a 
messenger from the lord of the worlds.
62.
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you; and 
i know from allah what you do not know.
                                               
342see footnote to 2:19.
343in supplication or otherwise.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
143
63.
then do you wonder that there has come to you a reminder from 
your lord through a man from among you, that he may warn 
you and that you may fear allah so you might receive mercy?"
64.
but they denied him, so we saved him and those who were with 
him in the ship.  and we drowned those who denied our signs.  
indeed, they were a blind people.344
65.
and to the aad [we sent] their brother hud.  he said, "o my 
people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  
then will you not fear him?"
66.
said the eminent ones who disbelieved among his people, 
"indeed, we see you in foolishness, and indeed, we think you 
are of the liars."
67.
[hud] said, "o my people, there is not foolishness in me, but i 
am a messenger from the lord of the worlds.
68.
i convey to you the messages of my lord, and i am to you a 
trustworthy adviser.
69.
then do you wonder that there has come to you a reminder from 
your lord through a man from among you, that he may warn 
you?  and remember when he made you successors after the 
people of noah and increased you in stature extensively.  so 
remember the favors of allah that you might succeed."
70.
they said, "have you come to us that we should worship allah
alone and leave what our fathers have worshipped?  then bring
us what you promise us,345 if you should be of the truthful."
71.
[hud] said, "already have defilement and anger fallen upon 
you from your lord.  do you dispute with me concerning 
[mere] names you have named them,346 you and your fathers, 
for which allah has not sent down any authority?  then wait; 
indeed, i am with you among those who wait."
72.
so we saved him and those with him by mercy from us.  and 
                                               
344for a more detailed account, see 11:25-48.
345i.e., allah's punishment.
346the false objects of worship which you have called "gods."

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 8
144
we eliminated those who denied our signs, and they were not 
[at all] believers.
73.
and to the thamud [we sent] their brother salih.  he said, "o 
my people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  
there has come to you clear evidence from your lord.  this is 
the she-camel of allah [sent] to you as a sign.  so leave her to 
eat within allah's land and do not touch her with harm, lest 
there seize you a painful punishment.
74.
and remember when he made you successors after the aad 
and settled you in the land, [and] you take for yourselves 
palaces from its plains and carve from the mountains, homes.  
then remember the favors of allah and do not commit abuse 
on the earth, spreading corruption."
75.
said the eminent ones who were arrogant among his people to 
those who were oppressed – to those who believed among them,
"do you [actually] know that salih is sent from his lord?"  
they said, "indeed we, in that with which he was sent, are 
believers."
76.
said those who were arrogant, "indeed we, in that which you 
have believed, are disbelievers."
77.
so they hamstrung the she-camel and were insolent toward the 
command of their lord and said, "o salih, bring us what you 
promise us, if you should be of the messengers."
78.
so the earthquake seized them, and they became within their 
home [corpses] fallen prone.
79.
and he [i.e., salih] turned away from them and said, "o my 
people, i had certainly conveyed to you the message of my 
lord and advised you, but you do not like advisors."
80.
and [we had sent] lot when he said to his people, "do you 
commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with 
from among the worlds [i.e., peoples]?
81.
indeed, you approach men with desire, instead of women.  
rather, you are a transgressing people."

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
145
82.
but the answer of his people was only that they said, "evict them 
from your city!  indeed, they are men who keep themselves pure."
83.
so we saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was 
of those who remained [with the evildoers].
84.
and we rained upon them a rain [of stones].  then see how 
was the end of the criminals.
85.
and to [the people of] madyan [we sent] their brother shuayb.  
he said, "o my people, worship allah; you have no deity other 
than him.  there has come to you clear evidence from your lord.  
so fulfill the measure and weight and do not deprive people of 
their due and cause not corruption upon the earth after its 
reformation.  that is better for you, if you should be believers.
86.
and do not sit on every path, threatening and averting from 
the way of allah those who believe in him, seeking to make it 
[seem] deviant.  and remember when you were few and he 
increased you.  and see how was the end of the corrupters.
87.
and if there should be a group among you who has believed 
in that with which i have been sent and a group that has not 
believed, then be patient until allah judges between us.  and 
he is the best of judges."
88.
said the eminent ones who were arrogant among his people, 
"we will surely evict you, o shuayb, and those who have 
believed with you from our city, or you must return to our 
religion."  he said, "even if we were unwilling?
89.
we would have invented against allah a lie if we returned to 
your religion after allah had saved us from it.  and it is not 
for us to return to it except that allah, our lord, should will.  
our lord has encompassed all things in knowledge.  upon allah
we have relied.  our lord, decide between us and our people 
in truth, and you are the best of those who give decision."
90.
said the eminent ones who disbelieved among his people, "if 
you should follow shuayb, indeed, you would then be losers."
91.
so the earthquake seized them, and they became within their 
home [corpses] fallen prone.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
146
92. those who denied shuayb – it was as though they had never 
resided there.  those who denied shuayb – it was they who 
were the losers.
93. and he [i.e., shuayb] turned away from them and said, "o my 
people, i had certainly conveyed to you the messages of my
lord and advised you, so how could i grieve for a disbelieving
people?"
94. and we sent to no city a prophet [who was denied] except 
that we seized its people with poverty and hardship that they 
might humble themselves [to allah].
95. then we exchanged in place of the bad [condition], good, 
until they increased [and prospered] and said, "our fathers 
[also] were touched with hardship and ease."347  so we seized 
them suddenly while they did not perceive.348
96. and if only the people of the cities had believed and feared allah,
we would have opened [i.e., bestowed] upon them blessings from
the heaven and the earth; but they denied [the messengers], so 
we seized them for what they were earning.349
97. then, did the people of the cities feel secure from our punishment 
coming to them at night while they were asleep?
98. or did the people of the cities feel secure from our punishment
coming to them in the morning while they were at play?350
99. then, did they feel secure from the plan of allah?  but no one 
feels secure from the plan of allah except the losing people.
100. has it not become clear to those who inherited the earth after its
[previous] people that if we willed, we could afflict them for 
their sins?  but we seal over their hearts so they do not hear.351
                                               
347instead of being grateful to allah for his blessings, they merely attributed 
them to the changing fortunes of time.
348that they had been tried and tested.
349of blame for their sin.
350i.e., occupied with such activities that have no benefit.
351they do not benefit from what they hear.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
147
101. those cities – we relate to you, [o muhammad], some of 
their news.  and certainly did their messengers come to them 
with clear proofs, but they were not to believe in that which 
they had denied before.352  thus does allah seal over the 
hearts of the disbelievers.
102. and we did not find for most of them any covenant;353 but 
indeed, we found most of them defiantly disobedient.
103. then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh 
and his establishment, but they were unjust toward them.354  
so see how was the end of the corrupters.
104. and moses said, "o pharaoh, i am a messenger from the lord 
of the worlds
105. [who is] obligated not to say about allah except the truth.  i 
have come to you with clear evidence from your lord, so send 
with me the children of israel."355
106. [pharaoh] said, "if you have come with a sign, then bring it 
forth, if you should be of the truthful."
107. so he [i.e., moses] threw his staff, and suddenly it was a serpent,
manifest.356
108. and he drew out his hand; thereupon it was white [with radiance]
for the observers.
109. said the eminent among the people of pharaoh, "indeed, this 
is a learned magician
110. who wants to expel you from your land [through magic], so 
what do you instruct?"
111. they said,357 "postpone [the matter of] him and his brother 
and send among the cities gatherers
                                               
352i.e., they persistently denied every warning given them.
353i.e., they were found to be unfaithful and negligent of allah's covenant.
354i.e., they rejected and opposed the signs.
355i.e., free them from oppression and allow them to emigrate.
356i.e., genuine and not imagined, as a miracle from allah.
357after mutual consultation and agreement.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
148
112. who will bring you every learned magician."
113. and the magicians came to pharaoh.  they said, "indeed for 
us is a reward if we are the predominant."
114. he said, "yes, and, [moreover], you will be among those made
near [to me]."
115. they said, "o moses, either you throw [your staff], or we will 
be the ones to throw [first]."
116. he said, "throw," and when they threw, they bewitched the 
eyes of the people and struck terror into them, and they 
presented a great [feat of] magic.358
117. and we inspired to moses, "throw your staff," and at once it 
devoured what they were falsifying.
118. so the truth was established, and abolished was what they 
were doing.
119. and they [i.e., pharaoh and his people] were overcome right 
there and became debased.
120. and the magicians fell down in prostration [to allah].
121. they said, "we have believed in the lord of the worlds,
122. the lord of moses and aaron."
123. said pharaoh, "you believed in him359 before i gave you 
permission.  indeed, this is a conspiracy which you conspired 
in the city to expel therefrom its people.  but you are going to 
know.
124. i will surely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides;
then i will surely crucify you all."
125. they said, "indeed, to our lord we will return.
126. and you do not resent us except because we believed in the
signs of our lord when they came to us.  our lord, pour upon
us patience360 and let us die as muslims [in submission to you]."
                                               
358their staffs and ropes appeared as writhing snakes.
359i.e., in moses, avoiding the mention of allah (subhanahu wa taala).
360to endure the torture to which we will be subjected.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
149
127. and the eminent among the people of pharaoh said, "will you 
leave moses and his people to cause corruption in the land and 
abandon you and your gods?"  [pharaoh] said, "we will kill 
their sons and keep their women alive; and indeed, we are 
subjugators over them."
128. said moses to his people, "seek help through allah and be 
patient.  indeed, the earth belongs to allah.  he causes to inherit
it whom he wills of his servants.  and the [best] outcome is 
for the righteous."
129. they said, "we have been harmed before you came to us and 
after you have come to us."  he said, "perhaps your lord will 
destroy your enemy and grant you succession in the land and 
see how you will do."
130. and we certainly seized361 the people of pharaoh with years 
of famine and a deficiency in fruits that perhaps they would be 
reminded.
131. but when good [i.e., provision] came to them, they said, "this 
is ours [by right]."  and if a bad [condition] struck them, they
saw an evil omen in moses and those with him.  unquestionably,
their fortune is with allah, but most of them do not know.
132. and they said, "no matter what sign you bring us with which 
to bewitch us, we will not be believers in you."
133. so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs 
and blood as distinct signs, but they were arrogant and were a 
criminal people.
134. and when the punishment descended upon them, they said, 
"o moses, invoke for us your lord by what he has promised 
you.  if you [can] remove the punishment from us, we will surely
believe you, and we will send with you the children of israel."
135. but when we removed the punishment from them until a term
which they were to reach,362 then at once they broke their word.
                                               
361imposed on them by way of trial and warning.
362i.e., a specified term which would end with their reversion to disobedience
and disbelief.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
150
136. so we took retribution from them, and we drowned them in the
sea because they denied our signs and were heedless of them.
137. and we caused the people who had been oppressed to inherit 
the eastern regions of the land and the western ones, which we 
had blessed.  and the good word [i.e., decree] of your lord
was fulfilled for the children of israel because of what they 
had patiently endured.  and we destroyed [all] that pharaoh and
his people were producing and what they had been building.
138. and we took the children of israel across the sea; then they 
came upon a people intent in devotion to [some] idols of theirs.  
they [the children of israel] said, "o moses, make for us a god
just as they have gods."  he said, "indeed, you are a people 
behaving ignorantly.
139. indeed, those [worshippers] – destroyed is that in which they 
are [engaged], and worthless is whatever they were doing."
140. he said, "is it other than allah i should desire for you as a 
god363 while he has preferred you over the worlds?"
141. and [recall, o children of israel], when we saved you from
the people of pharaoh, [who were] afflicting you with the worst 
torment – killing your sons and keeping your women alive.  
and in that was a great trial from your lord.
142. and we made an appointment with moses for thirty nights 
and perfected them by [the addition of] ten; so the term of his 
lord was completed as forty nights.  and moses said to his 
brother aaron, "take my place among my people, do right 
[by them],364 and do not follow the way of the corrupters."
143. and when moses arrived at our appointed time and his lord 
spoke to him, he said, "my lord, show me [yourself] that i 
may look at you."  [allah] said, "you will not see me,365 but 
look at the mountain; if it should remain in place, then you 
                                               
363an object of worship.
364i.e., keep their affairs in order.
365during the life of this world.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
151
will see me."  but when his lord appeared to the mountain, 
he rendered it level,366 and moses fell unconscious.  and 
when he awoke, he said, "exalted are you!  i have repented to 
you, and i am the first of the believers."
144. [allah] said, "o moses, i have chosen you over the people 
with my messages and my words [to you].  so take what i 
have given you and be among the grateful."
145. and we wrote for him on the tablets [something] of all 
things – instruction and explanation for all things, [saying], 
"take them with determination and order your people to take 
the best of it.  i will show you the home of the defiantly 
disobedient."367
146. i will turn away from my signs those who are arrogant upon 
the earth without right; and if they should see every sign, 
they will not believe in it.  and if they see the way of 
consciousness,368 they will not adopt it as a way; but if they 
see the way of error, they will adopt it as a way.  that is because
they have denied our signs and they were heedless of them.
147. those who denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter –
their deeds have become worthless.  are they recompensed 
except for what they used to do?
148. and the people of moses made, after [his departure], from 
their ornaments a calf – an image having a lowing sound.  
did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide 
them to a way?  they took it [for worship], and they were 
wrongdoers.
149. and when regret overcame them369 and they saw that they had 
gone astray, they said, "if our lord does not have mercy upon 
us and forgive us, we will surely be among the losers."
                                               
366it crumbled to dust.
367this is a severe warning from allah against rebellion.
368i.e., reason and integrity.
369literally, "when their hands had been descended upon," i.e., bitten by 
them out of severe regret.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
152
150. and when moses returned to his people, angry and grieved, 
he said, "how wretched is that by which you have replaced 
me after [my departure].  were you impatient over the matter 
of your lord?"  and he threw down the tablets and seized his 
brother by [the hair of] his head, pulling him toward him.  
[aaron] said, "o son of my mother, indeed the people oppressed
me and were about to kill me, so let not the enemies rejoice 
over me370 and do not place me among the wrongdoing people."
151. [moses] said, "my lord, forgive me and my brother and admit 
us into your mercy, for you are the most merciful of the 
merciful."
152. indeed, those who took the calf [for worship] will obtain anger 
from their lord and humiliation in the life of this world, and 
thus do we recompense the inventors [of falsehood].
153. but those who committed misdeeds and then repented after them 
and believed – indeed your lord, thereafter, is forgiving and 
merciful.
154. and when the anger subsided in moses, he took up the tablets;
and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who 
are fearful of their lord.
155. and moses chose from his people seventy men for our 
appointment.371  and when the earthquake seized them,372 he 
said, "my lord, if you had willed, you could have destroyed 
them before and me [as well].  would you destroy us for what 
the foolish among us have done?  this is not but your trial by 
which you send astray whom you will and guide whom you 
will.  you are our protector, so forgive us and have mercy 
upon us; and you are the best of forgivers.
156. and decree for us in this world [that which is] good and 
[also] in the hereafter; indeed, we have turned back to you."  
                                               
370i.e., over your humiliation of me.
371whereupon they were to apologize to allah for having worshipped the calf.
372upon reaching the appointed place, they said to moses, "we will not believe
until we see allah outright."  so the mountain convulsed, killing them.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
153
[allah] said, "my punishment – i afflict with it whom i will, 
but my mercy encompasses all things."  so i will decree it 
[especially] for those who fear me and give zakah and those 
who believe in our verses –
157. those who follow the messenger, the unlettered prophet, 
whom they find written [i.e., mentioned] in what they have of 
the torah and the gospel, who enjoins upon them what is 
right and forbids them what is wrong and makes lawful for 
them the good things and prohibits for them the evil and 
relieves them of their burden373 and the shackles which were 
upon them.374  so they who have believed in him, honored 
him, supported him and followed the light which was sent 
down with him – it is those who will be the successful.
158. say, [o muhammad], "o mankind, indeed i am the messenger
of allah to you all, [from him] to whom belongs the dominion
of the heavens and the earth.  there is no deity except him; 
he gives life and causes death."  so believe in allah and his
messenger, the unlettered prophet, who believes in allah and 
his words, and follow him that you may be guided.
159. and among the people of moses is a community375 which 
guides by truth and by it establishes justice.
160. and we divided them into twelve descendant tribes376 [as 
distinct] nations.  and we inspired to moses when his people 
implored him for water, "strike with your staff the stone," 
and there gushed forth from it twelve springs.  every people 
[i.e., tribe] knew its watering place.  and we shaded them 
with clouds and sent down upon them manna and quails, 
[saying], "eat from the good things with which we have 
provided you."  and they wronged us not, but they were 
[only] wronging themselves.
                                               
373difficulties in religious practice.
374i.e., extreme measures previously required for repentance, and retribution 
without recourse to compensation.
375those of them who accepted and followed the final prophet, muhammad ().
376from the twelve sons of jacob.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
154
161. and [mention, o muhammad], when it was said to them, 
"dwell in this city [i.e., jerusalem] and eat from it wherever 
you will and say, 'relieve us of our burdens [i.e., sins],' and 
enter the gate bowing humbly; we will [then] forgive you 
your sins.  we will increase the doers of good [in goodness 
and reward]."
162. but those who wronged among them changed [the words] to a 
statement other than that which had been said to them.  so we 
sent upon them a punishment from the sky for the wrong that 
they were doing.
163. and ask them about the town that was by the sea – when they 
transgressed in [the matter of] the sabbath – when their fish 
came to them openly on their sabbath day, and the day they 
had no sabbath they did not come to them.  thus did we give 
them trial because they were defiantly disobedient.
164. and when a community among them said, "why do you advise
[or warn] a people whom allah is [about] to destroy or to 
punish with a severe punishment?" they [the advisors] said, 
"to be absolved before your lord and perhaps they may fear 
him."
165. and when they [i.e., those advised] forgot that by which they 
had been reminded, we saved those who had forbidden evil 
and seized those who wronged, with a wretched punishment, 
because they were defiantly disobeying.
166. so when they were insolent about that which they had been 
forbidden, we said to them, "be apes, despised."
167. and [mention] when your lord declared that he would surely
[continue to] send upon them until the day of resurrection 
those who would afflict them with the worst torment.  indeed,
your lord is swift in penalty; but indeed, he is forgiving and 
merciful.
168. and we divided them throughout the earth into nations.  of
them some were righteous, and of them some were otherwise.  
and we tested them with good [times] and bad that perhaps 
they would return [to obedience].

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
155
169. and there followed them successors who inherited the 
scripture [while] taking the commodities377 of this lower life 
and saying, "it will be forgiven for us."  and if an offer like 
it378 comes to them, they will [again] take it.  was not the 
covenant of the scripture [i.e., the torah] taken from them 
that they would not say about allah except the truth, and they 
studied what was in it?  and the home of the hereafter is 
better for those who fear allah, so will you not use reason?
170. but those who hold fast to the book [i.e., the quran] and 
establish prayer – indeed, we will not allow to be lost the 
reward of the reformers.
171. and [mention] when we raised the mountain above them as 
if it was a dark cloud and they were certain that it would fall 
upon them,379 [and allah said], "take what we have given 
you with determination and remember what is in it that you 
might fear allah."
172. and [mention] when your lord took from the children of 
adam – from their loins – their descendants and made them 
testify of themselves, [saying to them], "am i not your lord?"  
they said, "yes, we have testified." [this] – lest you should say
on the day of resurrection, "indeed, we were of this unaware."
173. or [lest] you say, "it was only that our fathers associated 
[others in worship] with allah before, and we were but 
descendants after them.  then would you destroy us for what 
the falsifiers have done?"
174. and thus do we [explain in] detail the verses, and perhaps 
they will return.380
175. and recite to them, [o muhammad], the news of him381 to 
                                               
377i.e., unlawful gains and pleasures.
378i.e., a similar temptation.
379for their rebellion and disobedience.
380to the way of allah (subhanahu wa taala), from their diversions and 
deviations.
381a man from the children of israel at the time of moses.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
156
whom we gave [knowledge of] our signs, but he detached 
himself from them; so satan pursued him, and he became of 
the deviators.382
176. and if we had willed, we could have elevated him thereby,383
but he adhered [instead] to the earth384 and followed his own 
desire.  so his example is like that of the dog:  if you chase 
him, he pants, or if you leave him, he [still] pants.  that is the 
example of the people who denied our signs.385  so relate the 
stories that perhaps they will give thought.
177. how evil an example [is that of] the people who denied our 
signs and used to wrong themselves.
178. whoever allah guides – he is the [rightly] guided; and 
whoever he sends astray386 – it is those who are the losers.
179. and we have certainly created for hell many of the jinn and 
mankind.  they have hearts with which they do not understand,
they have eyes with which they do not see, and they have ears
with which they do not hear.  those are like livestock; rather, 
they are more astray.387  it is they who are the heedless.
180. and to allah belong the best names, so invoke him by them.  
and leave [the company of] those who practice deviation 
concerning his names.388  they will be recompensed for what 
they have been doing.
181. and among those we created is a community389 which guides 
by truth and thereby establishes justice.
                                               
382those who deliberately persist in error to the point of destruction.
383i.e., through the revelations, signs or evidences of which he had been 
given knowledge.
384i.e., its worldly pleasures.
385whether or not they have been exposed to allah's signs or warnings, it is 
all the same:  they will not believe.
386as a result of persistence in evil and rejection of truth.
387the reference is to their inability (i.e., refusal) to think and reason, while 
blindly following (as they are accustomed).
388i.e., use them improperly or deny them.
389the followers of prophet muhammad ().

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
157
182. but those who deny our signs – we will progressively lead 
them [to destruction]390 from where they do not know.
183. and i will give them time.  indeed, my plan is firm.
184. then do they not give thought?  there is in their companion 
[i.e., muhammad ()] no madness.  he is not but a clear warner.
185. do they not look into the realm of the heavens and the earth 
and everything that allah has created and [think] that perhaps 
their appointed time has come near?  so in what statement 
[i.e., message] hereafter will they believe?
186. whoever allah sends astray – there is no guide for him.  and 
he leaves them in their transgression, wandering blindly.
187. they ask you, [o muhammad], about the hour:  when is its 
arrival?391  say, "its knowledge is only with my lord.  none 
will reveal its time except him.  it lays heavily392 upon the 
heavens and the earth.  it will not come upon you except 
unexpectedly."  they ask you as if you are familiar with it.  
say, "its knowledge is only with allah, but most of the people
do not know."
188. say, "i hold not for myself [the power of] benefit or harm, 
except what allah has willed.  and if i knew the unseen, i 
could have acquired much wealth, and no harm would have 
touched me.  i am not except a warner and a bringer of good 
tidings to a people who believe."
189. it is he who created you from one soul and created from it its 
mate that he393 might dwell in security with her.  and when 
he [i.e., man] covers her,394 she carries a light burden [i.e., a 
pregnancy] and continues therein.  and when it becomes heavy,
                                               
390allah will test them with one favor after another in spite of their disobedience,
which only increases them in arrogance and sin.
391literally, "resting" or "establishment."
392i.e., it is a source of concern, worry or fear.
393i.e., man or every descendent of adam.
394an allusion to sexual intercourse.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
158
they both invoke allah, their lord, "if you should give us a 
good395 [child], we will surely be among the grateful."
190. but when he gives them a good [child], they396 ascribe 
partners to him concerning that which he has given them.  
exalted is allah above what they associate with him.
191. do they associate with him those who create nothing and they 
are [themselves] created?
192. and they [i.e., the false deities] are unable to [give] them help, 
nor can they help themselves.
193. and if you [believers] invite them to guidance, they will not 
follow you.  it is all the same for you whether you invite them
or you are silent.
194. indeed, those you [polytheists] call upon besides allah are 
servants [i.e., creations] like you.  so call upon them and let 
them respond to you, if you should be truthful.
195. do they have feet by which they walk?  or do they have 
hands by which they strike?  or do they have eyes by which 
they see?  or do they have ears by which they hear?  say, [o 
muhammad], "call your 'partners' and then conspire against 
me and give me no respite.
196. indeed, my protector is allah, who has sent down the book; 
and he is an ally to the righteous.
197. and those you call upon besides him are unable to help you, 
nor can they help themselves."
198. and if you invite them to guidance, they do not hear; and you 
see them looking at you while they do not see.
199. take what is given freely,397 enjoin what is good, and turn 
away from the ignorant.
                                               
395physically sound or righteous.
396the ungrateful man and woman or the polytheistic man and woman.
397from the dispositions of men or from their wealth.  in other words, be 
easy in dealing with them and avoid causing them difficulty.

surah 7 – al-araf
juz 9
159
200. and if an evil suggestion comes to you from satan, then seek 
refuge in allah.  indeed, he is hearing and knowing.
201. indeed, those who fear allah – when an impulse touches them
from satan, they remember [him] and at once they have insight.
202. but their brothers398 – they [i.e., the devils] increase them in 
error; then they do not stop short.
203. and when you, [o muhammad], do not bring them a sign 
[i.e., miracle], they say, "why have you not contrived it?"  
say, "i only follow what is revealed to me from my lord.  
this [quran] is enlightenment from your lord and guidance 
and mercy for a people who believe."
204. so when the quran is recited, then listen to it and pay 
attention that you may receive mercy.
205. and remember your lord within yourself in humility and in 
fear without being apparent in speech – in the mornings and 
the evenings.  and do not be among the heedless.
206. indeed, those who are near your lord [i.e., the angels] are not 
prevented by arrogance from his worship, and they exalt him, 
and to him they prostrate.
                                               
398those among mankind who listen to the devils and obey their orders.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 9
160
surah al-anfal
399
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. they ask you, [o muhammad], about the bounties [of war].  
say, "the [decision concerning] bounties is for allah and the 
messenger."  so fear allah and amend that which is between you 
and obey allah and his messenger, if you should be believers.
2. the believers are only those who, when allah is mentioned, 
their hearts become fearful, and when his verses are recited to 
them, it increases them in faith; and upon their lord they rely –
3. the ones who establish prayer, and from what we have 
provided them, they spend.
4. those are the believers, truly.  for them are degrees [of high 
position] with their lord and forgiveness and noble provision.
5. [it400 is] just as when your lord brought you out of your home 
[for the battle of badr] in truth, while indeed, a party among the 
believers were unwilling,
6. arguing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear, 
as if they were being driven toward death while they were 
looking on.
7. [remember, o believers], when allah promised you one of the 
two groups401 – that it would be yours – and you wished that the 
unarmed one would be yours.  but allah intended to establish 
the truth by his words and to eliminate the disbelievers
8. that he should establish the truth and abolish falsehood, even if 
the criminals disliked it.
9. [remember] when you asked help of your lord, and he 
answered you, "indeed, i will reinforce you with a thousand 
from the angels, following one another."
                                               
399al-anfal:  the bounties, meaning those things acquired in addition to victory, 
i.e., the spoils of war.
400referring to a dispute which occurred among the muslims over distribution
of war booty.
401i.e., either the caravan of quraysh or their army.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 9
161
10.
and allah made it not but good tidings and so that your hearts 
would be assured thereby.  and victory is not but from allah.  
indeed, allah is exalted in might and wise.
11.
[remember] when he overwhelmed you with drowsiness 
[giving] security from him and sent down upon you from the 
sky, rain by which to purify you and remove from you the evil 
[suggestions] of satan and to make steadfast your hearts and 
plant firmly thereby your feet.
12.
[remember] when your lord inspired to the angels, "i am 
with you, so strengthen those who have believed.  i will cast 
terror into the hearts of those who disbelieved, so strike [them]
upon the necks and strike from them every fingertip."402
13.
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger.  and 
whoever opposes allah and his messenger – indeed, allah is 
severe in penalty.
14.
"that [is yours], so taste it."  and indeed for the disbelievers 
is the punishment of the fire.
15.
o you who have believed, when you meet those who disbelieve
advancing [in battle], do not turn to them your backs [in flight].
16.
and whoever turns his back to them on such a day, unless 
swerving [as a strategy] for war or joining [another] company, 
has certainly returned with anger [upon him] from allah, and 
his refuge is hell – and wretched is the destination.
17.
and you did not kill them, but it was allah who killed them.403  
and you threw not, [o muhammad], when you threw, but it 
was allah who threw404 that he might test the believers with a 
good test.405  indeed, allah is hearing and knowing.
                                               
402by which they grasp and manipulate their weapons.  also interpreted as 
"all extremities," i.e., their hands and feet.
403i.e., your strength was insufficient to overcome them, but allah supported
you and gave you victory.
404when the prophet () threw a handful of dust into the faces of the 
disbelievers, allah caused it to fill the eyes and nose of every soldier, 
preventing their advance.
405so that they would appreciate allah's favor to them.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 9
162
18.
that [is so], and [also] that allah will weaken the plot of the 
disbelievers.
19.
if you [disbelievers] seek the decision [i.e., victory] – the 
decision [i.e., defeat] has come to you.  and if you desist 
[from hostilities], it is best for you; but if you return [to war], 
we will return, and never will you be availed by your [large] 
company at all, even if it should increase; and [that is] because 
allah is with the believers.
20.
o you who have believed, obey allah and his messenger and 
do not turn from him while you hear [his order].
21.
and do not be like those who say, "we have heard," while 
they do not hear.
22.
indeed, the worst of living creatures in the sight of allah are 
the deaf and dumb who do not use reason [i.e., the disbelievers].
23.
had allah known any good in them, he would have made 
them hear.  and if he had made them hear, they would [still] 
have turned away, while they were refusing.
24.
o you who have believed, respond to allah and to the 
messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life.  
and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart 
and that to him you will be gathered.
25.
and fear a trial406 which will not strike those who have 
wronged among you exclusively, and know that allah is 
severe in penalty.
26.
and remember when you were few and oppressed in the land, 
fearing that people might abduct you, but he sheltered you, 
supported you with his victory, and provided you with good 
things – that you might be grateful.
27.
o you who have believed, do not betray allah and the messenger
or betray your trusts while you know [the consequence].
                                               
406i.e., an affliction or punishment during life upon this earth.  when 
corruption spreads among a people, its consequences will affect everyone.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 9
163
28.
and know that your properties and your children are but a 
trial and that allah has with him a great reward.
29.
o you who have believed, if you fear allah, he will grant you 
a criterion407 and will remove from you your misdeeds and 
forgive you.  and allah is the possessor of great bounty.
30.
and [remember, o muhammad], when those who disbelieved 
plotted against you to restrain you or kill you or evict you 
[from makkah].  but they plan, and allah plans.  and allah is 
the best of planners.
31.
and when our verses are recited to them, they say, "we have 
heard.  if we willed, we could say [something] like this.  this 
is not but legends of the former peoples."
32.
and [remember] when they said, "o allah, if this should be 
the truth from you, then rain down upon us stones from the 
sky or bring us a painful punishment."
33.
but allah would not punish them while you, [o muhammad], 
are among them, and allah would not punish them while they 
seek forgiveness.
34.
but why should allah not punish them while they obstruct 
[people] from al-masjid al-haram and they were not [fit to be] 
its guardians?  its [true] guardians are not but the righteous, 
but most of them do not know.
35.
and their prayer at the house [i.e., the kabah] was not except 
whistling and handclapping.  so taste the punishment for what 
you disbelieved [i.e., practiced of deviations].
36.
indeed, those who disbelieve spend their wealth to avert 
[people] from the way of allah.  so they will spend it; then it 
will be for them a [source of] regret; then they will be 
overcome.  and those who have disbelieved – unto hell they 
will be gathered.
                                               
407by which to judge between truth and falsehood.  also interpreted as a 
"way out" of difficulties.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
164
37.
[it is] so that allah may distinguish the wicked from the good 
and place the wicked some of them upon others and heap 
them all together and put them into hell.  it is those who are 
the losers.
38.
say to those who have disbelieved [that] if they cease, what 
has previously occurred will be forgiven for them.  but if they 
return [to hostility] – then the precedent of the former 
[rebellious] peoples has already taken place.408
39.
and fight them until there is no fitnah409 and [until] the 
religion [i.e., worship], all of it, is for allah.410  and if they 
cease – then indeed, allah is seeing of what they do.
40.
but if they turn away – then know that allah is your protector.  
excellent is the protector, and excellent is the helper.
41.
and know that anything you obtain of war booty – then 
indeed, for allah is one fifth of it and for the messenger411 and 
for [his] near relatives412 and the orphans, the needy, and the 
[stranded] traveler,413 if you have believed in allah and in that 
which we sent down to our servant414 on the day of criterion 
[i.e., decisive encounter] – the day when the two armies met 
[at badr].  and allah, over all things, is competent.
42.
[remember] when you were on the near side of the valley, 
and they were on the farther side, and the caravan was lower 
[in position] than you.  if you had made an appointment [to meet], 
you would have missed the appointment.  but [it was] so that 
allah might accomplish a matter already destined – that those 
who perished [through disbelief] would perish upon evidence 
                                               
408this is a warning that punishment is always the result of rebellion against 
allah and his messengers.
409persecution.  see footnote to 2:193.
410i.e., until polytheism is no longer dominant.
411to be spent in allah's cause.
412the tribes of banu hashim and banu muttalib, who were not eligible for 
zakah.
413the remaining four fifths are divided among the soldiers.
414prophet muhammad ().

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
165
and those who lived [in faith] would live upon evidence; and 
indeed, allah is hearing and knowing.
43.
[remember, o muhammad], when allah showed them to you 
in your dream as few; and if he had shown them to you as many,
you [believers] would have lost courage and would have 
disputed in the matter [of whether to fight], but allah saved 
[you from that].  indeed, he is knowing of that within the breasts.
44.
and [remember] when he showed them to you, when you met,
as few in your eyes, and he made you [appear] as few in their 
eyes so that allah might accomplish a matter already destined.  
and to allah are [all] matters returned.
45.
o you who have believed, when you encounter a company 
[from the enemy forces], stand firm and remember allah much
that you may be successful.
46.
and obey allah and his messenger, and do not dispute and 
[thus] lose courage and [then] your strength would depart; and 
be patient.  indeed, allah is with the patient.
47.
and do not be like those who came forth from their homes 
insolently and to be seen by people and avert [them] from the 
way of allah.  and allah is encompassing415 of what they do.
48.
and [remember] when satan made their deeds pleasing to 
them and said, "no one can overcome you today from among 
the people, and indeed, i am your protector."  but when the 
two armies sighted each other, he turned on his heels and said, 
"indeed, i am disassociated from you.  indeed, i see what you 
do not see; indeed, i fear allah.  and allah is severe in penalty."
49.
[remember] when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was
disease [i.e., arrogance and disbelief] said, "their religion has 
deluded those [muslims]."  but whoever relies upon allah –
then indeed, allah is exalted in might and wise.
50.
and if you could but see when the angels take the souls of those
                                               
415in knowledge.  see footnote to 2:19.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
166
who disbelieved...416  they are striking their faces and their 
backs and [saying], "taste the punishment of the burning fire.
51.
that is for what your hands have put forth [of evil] and because
allah is not ever unjust to his servants."
52.
[theirs is] like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of 
those before them.  they disbelieved in the signs of allah, so 
allah seized them for their sins.  indeed, allah is powerful 
and severe in penalty.
53.
that is because allah would not change a favor which he had 
bestowed upon a people until they change what is within 
themselves.  and indeed, allah is hearing and knowing.
54.
[theirs is] like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of 
those before them.  they denied the signs of their lord, so we 
destroyed them for their sins, and we drowned the people of 
pharaoh.  and all [of them] were wrongdoers.
55.
indeed, the worst of living creatures in the sight of allah are 
those who have disbelieved, and they will not [ever] believe –
56.
the ones with whom you made a treaty but then they break 
their pledge every time, and they do not fear allah.
57.
so if you, [o muhammad], gain dominance over them in war, 
disperse by [means of] them those behind them that perhaps 
they will be reminded.417
58.
if you [have reason to] fear from a people betrayal, throw 
[their treaty] back to them, [putting you] on equal terms.418  
indeed, allah does not like traitors.
                                               
416this sentence is left incomplete for additional effect.  its conclusion is 
left to the imagination of the reader or listener and estimated as "...you 
would see a dreadful sight."
417i.e., kill them and make an example of them to discourage those who 
follow them.
418when you see signs of treachery from those with whom you have made a 
treaty, announce to them its dissolution so they will know exactly where 
they stand.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
167
59.
and let not those who disbelieve think they will escape.  indeed,
they will not cause failure [to allah].
60.
and prepare against them whatever you are able of power and 
of steeds of war419 by which you may terrify the enemy of allah
and your enemy and others besides them whom you do not 
know [but] whom allah knows.  and whatever you spend in 
the cause of allah will be fully repaid to you, and you will not 
be wronged.
61.
and if they incline to peace, then incline to it [also] and rely
upon allah.  indeed, it is he who is the hearing, the knowing.
62.
but if they intend to deceive you – then sufficient for you is allah.  
it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
63.
and brought together their hearts.  if you had spent all that is 
in the earth, you could not have brought their hearts together; 
but allah brought them together.  indeed, he is exalted in 
might and wise.
64.
o prophet, sufficient for you is allah and for whoever follows 
you of the believers.
65.
o prophet, urge the believers to battle.  if there are among you 
twenty [who are] steadfast, they will overcome two hundred.  
and if there are among you one hundred [who are] steadfast, 
they will overcome a thousand of those who have disbelieved 
because they are a people who do not understand.
66.
now, allah has lightened [the hardship] for you, and he knows 
that among you is weakness.  so if there are from you one 
hundred [who are] steadfast, they will overcome two hundred.  
and if there are among you a thousand, they will overcome 
two thousand by permission of allah.  and allah is with the 
steadfast.
67.
it is not for a prophet to have captives [of war] until he inflicts 
a massacre [upon allah's enemies] in the land.  you [i.e., 
some muslims] desire the commodities of this world,420 but 
                                               
419or equipment which serves the same purpose.
420i.e., material benefit, such as the ransom paid for prisoners.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
168
allah desires [for you] the hereafter.  and allah is exalted in 
might and wise.
68.
if not for a decree from allah that preceded,421 you would 
have been touched for what you took by a great punishment.
69.
so consume what you have taken of war booty [as being] 
lawful and good, and fear allah.  indeed, allah is forgiving 
and merciful.
70.
o prophet, say to whoever is in your hands of the captives, "if 
allah knows [any] good in your hearts, he will give you 
[something] better than what was taken from you, and he will 
forgive you; and allah is forgiving and merciful."
71.
but if they intend to betray you – then they have already 
betrayed allah before, and he empowered [you] over them.  
and allah is knowing and wise.
72.
indeed, those who have believed and emigrated and fought 
with their wealth and lives in the cause of allah and those 
who gave shelter and aided – they are allies of one another.  
but those who believed and did not emigrate – for you there is 
no support of them until they emigrate.  and if they seek help 
of you for the religion, then you must help, except against a 
people between yourselves and whom is a treaty.  and allah 
is seeing of what you do.
73.
and those who disbelieved are allies of one another.  if you 
do not do so [i.e., ally yourselves with other believers], there 
will be fitnah [i.e., disbelief and oppression] on earth and 
great corruption.
74.
but those who have believed and emigrated and fought in the 
cause of allah and those who gave shelter and aided – it is 
they who are the believers, truly.  for them is forgiveness and 
noble provision.
                                               
421three interpretations of the "decree" are given:  that by which the 
companions of badr were forgiven, that by which indeliberate errors in 
judgement by believers are not punished, and that which made lawful the 
spoils of war.

surah 8 – al-anfal
juz 10
169
75.
and those who believed after [the initial emigration] and 
emigrated and fought with you – they are of you.  but those of 
[blood] relationship are more entitled [to inheritance] in the 
decree of allah.422  indeed, allah is knowing of all things.
                                               
422this applies to muslim relatives only.  others may be given by bequest.  
see 4:11.


juz 10
170

423
1. [this is a declaration of] disassociation, from allah and his 
messenger, to those with whom you had made a treaty among 
the polytheists.424
2. so travel freely, [o disbelievers], throughout the land [during] 
four months but know that you cannot cause failure to allah 
and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers.
3. and [it is] an announcement from allah and his messenger to 
the people on the day of the greater pilgrimage425 that allah is 
disassociated from the disbelievers, and [so is] his messenger.  
so if you repent, that is best for you; but if you turn away – then 
know that you will not cause failure to allah.426  and give 
tidings to those who disbelieve of a painful punishment.
4. excepted are those with whom you made a treaty among the 
polytheists and then they have not been deficient toward you in 
anything or supported anyone against you; so complete for them 
their treaty until their term [has ended].  indeed, allah loves the 
righteous [who fear him].
5. and when the sacred months427 have passed, then kill the
polytheists wherever you find them and capture them and besiege
them and sit in wait for them at every place of ambush.  but if 
they should repent, establish prayer, and give zakah, let them 
[go] on their way.  indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
6. and if any one of the polytheists seeks your protection, then 
grant him protection so that he may hear the words of allah 
                                               
423at-tawbah:  repentance.  this surah is also known as baraah, meaning 
disassociation, freedom, release or immunity.  the words bismillahir-
rahmanir-raheem were not revealed at the beginning of this surah.
424but who had violated it.
425hajj.  umrah is the lesser pilgrimage.
426i.e., you cannot escape his punishment.
427the four months mentioned in verse 2, i.e., muharram, rajab, dhul-qadah
and dhul-hijjah.


juz 10
171
[i.e., the quran].  then deliver him to his place of safety.  
that is because they are a people who do not know.
7.
how can there be for the polytheists a treaty in the sight of 
allah and with his messenger, except for those with whom 
you made a treaty at al-masjid al-haram?  so as long as they 
are upright toward you,428 be upright toward them.  indeed, 
allah loves the righteous [who fear him].
8.
how [can there be a treaty] while, if they gain dominance over
you, they do not observe concerning you any pact of kinship 
or covenant of protection?  they satisfy you with their mouths,
but their hearts refuse [compliance], and most of them are 
defiantly disobedient.
9.
they have exchanged the signs of allah for a small price and 
averted [people] from his way.  indeed, it was evil that they 
were doing.
10.
they do not observe toward a believer any pact of kinship or 
covenant of protection.  and it is they who are the transgressors.
11.
but if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakah, then they 
are your brothers in religion; and we detail the verses for a 
people who know.
12.
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and defame 
your religion, then fight the leaders of disbelief, for indeed, 
there are no oaths [sacred] to them; [fight them that] they 
might cease.
13.
would you not fight a people who broke their oaths and 
determined to expel the messenger, and they had begun [the 
attack upon] you the first time?  do you fear them?  but allah 
has more right that you should fear him, if you are [truly] 
believers.
14.
fight them; allah will punish them by your hands and will 
disgrace them and give you victory over them and satisfy the 
breasts [i.e., desires] of a believing people
                                               
428i.e., maintain the terms of the treaty.


juz 10
172
15.
and remove the fury in their [i.e., the believers'] hearts.  and 
allah turns in forgiveness to whom he wills; and allah is 
knowing and wise.
16.
do you think that you will be left [as you are] while allah has not 
yet made evident those among you who strive [for his cause] and
do not take other than allah, his messenger and the believers 
as intimates?  and allah is acquainted with what you do.
17.
it is not for the polytheists to maintain the mosques of allah
[while] witnessing against themselves with disbelief.  [for] those,
their deeds have become worthless, and in the fire they will 
abide eternally.
18.
the mosques of allah are only to be maintained by those who 
believe in allah and the last day and establish prayer and 
give zakah and do not fear except allah, for it is expected that 
those will be of the [rightly] guided.
19.
have you made the providing of water for the pilgrim and the 
maintenance of al-masjid al-haram equal to [the deeds of] 
one who believes in allah and the last day and strives in the 
cause of allah?  they are not equal in the sight of allah.  and 
allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
20.
the ones who have believed, emigrated and striven in the cause
of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank in 
the sight of allah.  and it is those who are the attainers [of 
success].
21.
their lord gives them good tidings of mercy from him and 
approval and of gardens for them wherein is enduring pleasure.
22.
[they will be] abiding therein forever.  indeed, allah has with 
him a great reward.
23.
o you who have believed, do not take your fathers or your 
brothers as allies if they have preferred disbelief over belief.  
and whoever does so among you – then it is those who are the 
wrongdoers.
24.
say, [o muhammad], "if your fathers, your sons, your brothers,
your wives, your relatives, wealth which you have obtained, 


juz 10
173
commerce wherein you fear decline, and dwellings with which
you are pleased are more beloved to you than allah and his 
messenger and jihad [i.e., striving] in his cause, then wait 
until allah executes his command.  and allah does not guide 
the defiantly disobedient people."
25.
allah has already given you victory in many regions and [even] 
on the day of hunayn, when your great number pleased you, 
but it did not avail you at all, and the earth was confining for 
you with [i.e., in spite of] its vastness; then you turned back, 
fleeing.
26.
then allah sent down his tranquility upon his messenger and 
upon the believers and sent down soldiers [i.e., angels] whom 
you did not see and punished those who disbelieved.  and that 
is the recompense of the disbelievers.
27.
then allah will accept repentance after that for whom he 
wills; and allah is forgiving and merciful.
28.
o you who have believed, indeed the polytheists are unclean, 
so let them not approach al-masjid al-haram after this, their 
[final] year.  and if you fear privation, allah will enrich you 
from his bounty if he wills.  indeed, allah is knowing and wise.
29.
fight those who do not believe in allah or in the last day and 
who do not consider unlawful what allah and his messenger 
have made unlawful and who do not adopt the religion of truth 
[i.e., islam] from those who were given the scripture – [fight] 
until they give the jizyah429 willingly while they are humbled.
30.
the jews say, "ezra is the son of allah"; and the christians 
say, "the messiah is the son of allah."  that is their statement 
from their mouths; they imitate the saying of those who 
disbelieved before [them].  may allah destroy them; how are 
they deluded?
                                               
429a tax required of non-muslims exempting them from military service and 
entitling them to the protection of the islamic state.  concurrently, zakah 
is not taken from them, being an obligation only upon muslims.


juz 10
174
31.
they have taken their scholars and monks as lords besides 
allah,430 and [also] the messiah, the son of mary.431  and they 
were not commanded except to worship one god; there is no 
deity except him.  exalted is he above whatever they associate
with him.
32.
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths, 
but allah refuses except to perfect his light, although the 
disbelievers dislike it.
33.
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the 
religion of truth to manifest it over all religion, although they 
who associate others with allah dislike it.
34.
o you who have believed, indeed many of the scholars and 
the monks devour the wealth of people unjustly432 and avert 
[them] from the way of allah.  and those who hoard gold and 
silver and spend it not in the way of allah – give them tidings 
of a painful punishment.
35.
the day when it433 will be heated in the fire of hell and seared 
therewith will be their foreheads, their flanks, and their backs,
[it will be said], "this is what you hoarded for yourselves, so 
taste what you used to hoard."
36.
indeed, the number of months with allah is twelve [lunar] months 
in the register of allah [from] the day he created the heavens 
and the earth; of these, four are sacred.434  that is the correct 
religion [i.e., way], so do not wrong yourselves during them.435  
and fight against the disbelievers collectively as they fight against 
you collectively.  and know that allah is with the righteous 
[who fear him].
37.
indeed, the postponing [of restriction within sacred months] is 
an increase in disbelief by which those who have disbelieved 
                                               
430by their obedience to them rather than to what allah ordained.
431by their worship of him in conjunction with allah.
432i.e., through false pretense.
433the gold and silver which was hoarded, i.e., whose zakah was not paid.
434see footnote to 9:5.
435i.e., do not violate the sacred months or commit aggression therein.


juz 10
175
are led [further] astray.  they make it436 lawful one year and 
unlawful another year to correspond to the number made 
unlawful by allah437 and [thus] make lawful what allah has 
made unlawful.  made pleasing to them is the evil of their 
deeds; and allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
38.
o you who have believed, what is [the matter] with you that, 
when you are told to go forth in the cause of allah, you 
adhere heavily to the earth?438  are you satisfied with the life 
of this world rather than the hereafter?  but what is the 
enjoyment of worldly life compared to the hereafter except a 
[very] little.
39.
if you do not go forth, he will punish you with a painful 
punishment and will replace you with another people, and you 
will not harm him at all.  and allah is over all things 
competent.
40.
if you do not aid him [i.e., the prophet ()] – allah has 
already aided him when those who disbelieved had driven him 
out [of makkah] as one of two,439 when they were in the cave 
and he [i.e., muhammad ()] said to his companion, "do not 
grieve; indeed allah is with us."  and allah sent down his 
tranquility upon him and supported him with soldiers [i.e., 
angels] you did not see and made the word440 of those who 
disbelieved the lowest,441 while the word of allah442 – that is 
the highest.  and allah is exalted in might and wise.
41.
go forth, whether light or heavy,443 and strive with your wealth 
                                               
436fighting during a sacred month.
437if they found it advantageous to violate a sacred month, they would do so, 
designating another month in its place in which to observe the restrictions 
concerning fighting.
438i.e., inclining toward the comforts of worldly life.
439the second was his companion, abu bakr.
440i.e., their claims and slogans.
441i.e., degraded and dishonored.
442"la ilaha ill-allah" ("there is no deity except allah").
443i.e., young or old, riding or walking, in ease or in hardship – in all 
circumstances and conditions.


juz 10
176
and your lives in the cause of allah.  that is better for you, if 
you only knew.
42.
had it been a near [i.e., easy] gain and a moderate trip, they 
[i.e., the hypocrites] would have followed you, but distant to 
them was the journey.  and they will swear by allah,444 "if we 
were able, we would have gone forth with you," destroying 
themselves [through false oaths], and allah knows that indeed 
they are liars.
43.
may allah pardon you, [o muhammad]; why did you give 
them permission [to remain behind]?  [you should not have] 
until it was evident to you who were truthful and you knew 
[who were] the liars.
44.
those who believe in allah and the last day would not ask 
permission of you to be excused from striving [i.e., fighting] 
with their wealth and their lives.  and allah is knowing of 
those who fear him.
45.
only those would ask permission of you who do not believe in 
allah and the last day and whose hearts have doubted, and they,
in their doubt, are hesitating.
46.
and if they had intended to go forth, they would have prepared
for it [some] preparation.  but allah disliked their being sent, 
so he kept them back, and they were told, "remain [behind] 
with those who remain."445
47.
had they gone forth with you, they would not have increased 
you except in confusion, and they would have been active among 
you, seeking [to cause] you fitnah [i.e., chaos and dissension].  
and among you are avid listeners to them.  and allah is knowing
of the wrongdoers.
48.
they had already desired dissension before and had upset matters
for you446 until the truth came and the ordinance [i.e., victory] 
of allah appeared, while they were averse.
                                               
444when you return from the tabuk expedition.
445i.e., the women and children.
446or "turned matters related to you over [in their minds, considering how to 
cause you failure]."


juz 10
177
49.
and among them is he who says, "permit me [to remain at home]
and do not put me to trial."  unquestionably, into trial they have
fallen.447  and indeed, hell will encompass the disbelievers.
50.
if good befalls you, it distresses them; but if disaster strikes you,
they say, "we took our matter [in hand] before,"448 and turn 
away while they are rejoicing.
51.
say, "never will we be struck except by what allah has decreed
for us; he is our protector."  and upon allah let the believers rely.
52.
say, "do you await for us except one of the two best things 
[i.e., martyrdom or victory] while we await for you that allah 
will afflict you with punishment from himself or at our hands?  
so wait; indeed we, along with you, are waiting."
53.
say, "spend willingly or unwillingly; never will it be accepted 
from you.  indeed, you have been a defiantly disobedient people."
54.
and what prevents their expenditures from being accepted from 
them but that they have disbelieved in allah and in his messenger
and that they come not to prayer except while they are lazy 
and that they do not spend except while they are unwilling.
55.
so let not their wealth or their children impress you.  allah only 
intends to punish them through them in worldly life and that
their souls should depart [at death] while they are disbelievers.
56.
and they swear by allah that they are from among you while 
they are not from among you; but they are a people who are 
afraid.
57.
if they could find a refuge or some caves or any place to enter 
[and hide], they would turn to it while they run heedlessly.
58.
and among them are some who criticize you concerning the 
[distribution of] charities.  if they are given from them, they 
approve; but if they are not given from them, at once they 
become angry.
                                               
447by avoiding their obligation, they fell into destruction.
448the hypocrites claim to have protected themselves by remaining behind.


juz 10
178
59.
if only they had been satisfied with what allah and his 
messenger gave them and said, "sufficient for us is allah; 
allah will give us of his bounty, and [so will] his messenger; 
indeed, we are desirous toward allah,"449 [it would have been 
better for them].
60.
zakah expenditures are only for the poor and for the needy 
and for those employed for it450 and for bringing hearts 
together [for islam] and for freeing captives [or slaves] and 
for those in debt and for the cause of allah and for the 
[stranded] traveler – an obligation [imposed] by allah.  and 
allah is knowing and wise.
61.
and among them are those who abuse the prophet and say, 
"he is an ear."451  say, "[it is] an ear of goodness for you that 
believes in allah and believes the believers and [is] a mercy to 
those who believe among you."  and those who abuse the 
messenger of allah – for them is a painful punishment.
62.
they swear by allah to you [muslims] to satisfy you.  but 
allah and his messenger are more worthy for them to satisfy, 
if they should be believers.
63.
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his 
messenger – that for him is the fire of hell, wherein he will 
abide eternally?  that is the great disgrace.
64.
the hypocrites are apprehensive lest a surah be revealed about 
them, informing them of452 what is in their hearts.  say, 
"mock [as you wish]; indeed, allah will expose that which 
you fear."
65.
and if you ask them, they will surely say, "we were only 
conversing and playing."  say, "is it allah and his verses and 
his messenger that you were mocking?"
                                               
449meaning "we desire allah and his grace and acceptance," or "we desire 
whatever allah wills to give us of his bounty."
450by the state to collect, guard and distribute the zakah.
451i.e., one who believes everything he hears.
452i.e., exposing the truth about.


juz 10
179
66.
make no excuse; you have disbelieved [i.e., rejected faith] 
after your belief.  if we pardon one faction of you – we will 
punish another faction because they were criminals.
67.
the hypocrite men and hypocrite women are of one another.  
they enjoin what is wrong and forbid what is right and close 
their hands.453  they have forgotten allah, so he has forgotten 
them [accordingly].  indeed, the hypocrites – it is they who 
are the defiantly disobedient.
68.
allah has promised the hypocrite men and hypocrite women 
and the disbelievers the fire of hell, wherein they will abide 
eternally.  it is sufficient for them.  and allah has cursed them,
and for them is an enduring punishment.
69.
[you disbelievers are] like those before you; they were stronger
than you in power and more abundant in wealth and children.  
they enjoyed their portion [of worldly enjoyment], and you
have enjoyed your portion as those before you enjoyed their 
portion, and you have engaged [in vanities] like that in which 
they engaged.  [it is] those whose deeds have become worthless
in this world and in the hereafter, and it is they who are the 
losers.
70.
has there not reached them the news of those before them –
the people of noah and [the tribes of] aad and thamud and 
the people of ibrahim and the companions [i.e., dwellers] of 
madyan and the towns overturned?454  their messengers came 
to them with clear proofs.  and allah would never have wronged
them, but they were wronging themselves.
71.
the believing men and believing women are allies of one 
another.  they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong 
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey allah and his 
messenger.  those – allah will have mercy upon them.  
indeed, allah is exalted in might and wise.
                                               
453i.e., refuse to spend in the way of allah.
454i.e., those to which lot was sent and which earned for themselves allah's 
punishment.  see 11:82-83.


juz 10
180
72.
allah has promised the believing men and believing women
gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally, 
and pleasant dwellings in gardens of perpetual residence; but 
approval from allah is greater.  it is that which is the great 
attainment.
73.
o prophet, fight against the disbelievers and the hypocrites 
and be harsh upon them.  and their refuge is hell, and wretched
is the destination.
74.
they swear by allah that they did not say [anything against 
the prophet ()] while they had said the word of disbelief and 
disbelieved after their [pretense of] islam and planned that 
which they were not to attain.455  and they were not resentful 
except [for the fact] that allah and his messenger had 
enriched them of his bounty.456  so if they repent, it is better 
for them; but if they turn away, allah will punish them with a 
painful punishment in this world and the hereafter.  and there 
will not be for them on earth any protector or helper.
75.
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah, 
[saying], "if he should give us from his bounty, we will surely
spend in charity, and we will surely be among the righteous."
76.
but when he gave them from his bounty, they were stingy 
with it and turned away while they refused.
77.
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the 
day they will meet him – because they failed allah in what 
they promised him and because they [habitually] used to lie.
78.
did they not know that allah knows their secrets and their private 
conversations and that allah is the knower of the unseen?
79.
those who criticize the contributors among the believers 
concerning [their] charities and [criticize] the ones who find 
nothing [to spend] except their effort, so they ridicule them –
allah will ridicule them, and they will have a painful punishment.
                                               
455i.e., the murder of prophet muhammad ().
456i.e., for no reason.  on the contrary, they should have been grateful.


juz 10
181
80.
ask forgiveness for them, [o muhammad], or do not ask 
forgiveness for them.  if you should ask forgiveness for them 
seventy times – never will allah forgive them.  that is because
they disbelieved in allah and his messenger, and allah does 
not guide the defiantly disobedient people.
81.
those who remained behind rejoiced in their staying [at home]
after [the departure of] the messenger of allah and disliked to 
strive with their wealth and their lives in the cause of allah 
and said, "do not go forth in the heat."  say, "the fire of hell 
is more intense in heat" – if they would but understand.
82.
so let them laugh a little and [then] weep much as recompense 
for what they used to earn.
83.
if allah should return you to a faction of them [after the 
expedition] and then they ask your permission to go out [to 
battle], say, "you will not go out with me, ever, and you will 
never fight with me an enemy.  indeed, you were satisfied 
with sitting [at home] the first time, so sit [now] with those 
who stay behind."
84.
and do not pray [the funeral prayer, o muhammad], over any 
of them who has died – ever – or stand at his grave.  indeed, 
they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while 
they were defiantly disobedient.
85.
and let not their wealth and their children impress you.  allah 
only intends to punish them through them in this world and 
that their souls should depart [at death] while they are disbelievers.
86.
and when a surah was revealed [enjoining them] to believe in 
allah and to fight with his messenger, those of wealth among 
them asked your permission [to stay back] and said, "leave us 
to be with them who sit [at home]."
87.
they were satisfied to be with those who stay behind, and 
their hearts were sealed over, so they do not understand.
88.
but the messenger and those who believed with him fought 
with their wealth and their lives.  those will have [all that is] 
good, and it is those who are the successful.


juz 11
182
89.
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow,
wherein they will abide eternally.  that is the great attainment.
90.
and those with excuses among the bedouins came to be 
permitted [to remain], and they who had lied457 to allah and 
his messenger sat [at home].  there will strike those who 
disbelieved among them a painful punishment.
91.
there is not upon the weak or upon the ill or upon those who 
do not find anything to spend any discomfort [i.e., guilt] when 
they are sincere to allah and his messenger.  there is not 
upon the doers of good any cause [for blame].  and allah is 
forgiving and merciful.
92.
nor [is there blame] upon those who, when they came to you
that you might give them mounts, you said, "i can find nothing 
for you to ride upon."  they turned back while their eyes 
overflowed with tears out of grief that they could not find 
something to spend [for the cause of allah].
93.
the cause [for blame] is only upon those who ask permission 
of you while they are rich.  they are satisfied to be with those 
who stay behind, and allah has sealed over their hearts, so 
they do not know.
94.
they will make excuses to you when you have returned to them.  
say, "make no excuse – never will we believe you.  allah has 
already informed us of your news [i.e., affair].  and allah will 
observe your deeds, and [so will] his messenger; then you 
will be taken back to the knower of the unseen and the 
witnessed,458 and he will inform you of what you used to do."
95.
they will swear by allah to you when you return to them that 
you would leave them alone.  so leave them alone; indeed 
they are evil; and their refuge is hell as recompense for what 
they had been earning.
96.
they swear to you so that you might be satisfied with them.  
                                               
457i.e., claimed faith.
458see footnotes to 6:73.


juz 11
183
but if you should be satisfied with them – indeed, allah is not 
satisfied with a defiantly disobedient people.
97. the bedouins are stronger in disbelief and hypocrisy and more 
likely not to know the limits of what [laws] allah has revealed 
to his messenger.  and allah is knowing and wise.
98. and among the bedouins are some who consider what they 
spend as a loss459 and await for you turns of misfortune.  upon 
them will be a misfortune of evil.  and allah is hearing and 
knowing.
99. but among the bedouins are some who believe in allah and the
last day and consider what they spend as means of nearness 
to allah and of [obtaining] invocations of the messenger.  
unquestionably, it is a means of nearness for them.  allah will 
admit them to his mercy.  indeed, allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
100. and the first forerunners [in the faith] among the muhajireen460
and the ansar461 and those who followed them with good 
conduct – allah is pleased with them and they are pleased 
with him, and he has prepared for them gardens beneath 
which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever.  that is the 
great attainment.
101. and among those around you of the bedouins are hypocrites, 
and [also] from the people of madinah.  they have become 
accustomed to hypocrisy.  you, [o muhammad], do not know 
them, [but] we know them.  we will punish them twice [in 
this world]; then they will be returned to a great punishment.
102. and [there are] others who have acknowledged their sins.  
they had mixed [i.e., polluted] a righteous deed with another 
                                               
459i.e., a fine or penalty.
460those who emigrated from makkah and settled in madinah for the cause 
of islam.
461the inhabitants of madinah who had accepted islam and assisted the 
prophet () and other emigrants upon their arrival there.


juz 11
184
that was bad.462  perhaps allah will turn to them in forgiveness.  
indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
103. take, [o muhammad], from their wealth a charity by which 
you purify them and cause them increase, and invoke [allah's 
blessings] upon them.  indeed, your invocations are reassurance
for them.  and allah is hearing and knowing.
104. do they not know that it is allah who accepts repentance from 
his servants and receives charities and that it is allah who is 
the accepting of repentance, the merciful?
105. and say, "do [as you will], for allah will see your deeds, and 
[so will] his messenger and the believers.  and you will be 
returned to the knower of the unseen and the witnessed, and 
he will inform you of what you used to do."
106. and [there are] others deferred until the command of allah –
whether he will punish them or whether he will forgive them.  
and allah is knowing and wise.
107. and [there are] those [hypocrites] who took for themselves a 
mosque for causing harm and disbelief and division among 
the believers and as a station for whoever had warred against 
allah and his messenger before.  and they will surely swear, 
"we intended only the best."  and allah testifies that indeed 
they are liars.
108. do not stand [for prayer] within it – ever.  a mosque founded 
on righteousness from the first day463 is more worthy for you 
to stand in.  within it are men who love to purify themselves; 
and allah loves those who purify themselves.
109. then is one who laid the foundation of his building on 
righteousness [with fear] from allah and [seeking] his approval
better or one who laid the foundation of his building on the 
edge of a bank about to collapse, so it collapsed with him into
the fire of hell?  and allah does not guide the wrongdoing 
people.
                                               
462this refers to their having previously taken part in jihad but having 
abstained on the occasion of tabuk.
463this description is of the quba mosque.


juz 11
185
110. their building which they built will not cease to be a [cause of] 
skepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut [i.e., stopped].  
and allah is knowing and wise.
111. indeed, allah has purchased from the believers their lives and 
their properties [in exchange] for that they will have paradise.  
they fight in the cause of allah, so they kill and are killed.  
[it is] a true promise [binding] upon him in the torah and the 
gospel and the quran.  and who is truer to his covenant than 
allah?  so rejoice in your transaction which you have contracted.  
and it is that which is the great attainment.
112. [such believers are] the repentant, the worshippers, the 
praisers [of allah], the travelers [for his cause], those who 
bow and prostrate [in prayer], those who enjoin what is right 
and forbid what is wrong, and those who observe the limits 
[set by] allah.  and give good tidings to the believers.
113. it is not for the prophet and those who have believed to ask 
forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they were relatives, 
after it has become clear to them that they are companions of 
hellfire.
114. and the request of forgiveness of ibrahim for his father was 
only because of a promise he had made to him.  but when it 
became apparent to him [i.e., ibrahim] that he [i.e., the father]
was an enemy to allah, he disassociated himself from him.  
indeed was ibrahim compassionate and patient.
115. and allah would not let a people stray after he has guided 
them until he makes clear to them what they should avoid.  
indeed, allah is knowing of all things.
116. indeed, to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the 
earth; he gives life and causes death.  and you have not 
besides allah any protector or any helper.
117. allah has already forgiven the prophet and the muhajireen and 
the ansar who followed him in the hour of difficulty after the
hearts of a party of them had almost inclined [to doubt], and 
then he forgave them.  indeed, he was to them kind and 
merciful.


juz 11
186
118. and [he also forgave] the three who were left alone [i.e., 
boycotted, and then regretted their error] to the point that the 
earth closed in on them in spite of its vastness464 and their 
souls confined [i.e., anguished] them and they were certain 
that there is no refuge from allah except in him.  then he 
turned to them so they could repent.  indeed, allah is the 
accepting of repentance, the merciful.
119. o you who have believed, fear allah and be with those who 
are true.
120. it was not [proper] for the people of madinah and those 
surrounding them of the bedouins that they remain behind 
after [the departure of] the messenger of allah or that they 
prefer themselves over his self.465  that is because they are not 
afflicted by thirst or fatigue or hunger in the cause of allah,
nor do they tread on any ground that enrages the disbelievers, 
nor do they inflict upon an enemy any infliction but that it is 
registered for them as a righteous deed.  indeed, allah does 
not allow to be lost the reward of the doers of good.
121. nor do they spend an expenditure, small or large, or cross a 
valley but that it is registered for them that allah may reward 
them for the best of what they were doing.
122. and it is not for the believers to go forth [to battle] all at once.  
for there should separate from every division of them a group 
[remaining] to obtain understanding in the religion and warn 
[i.e., advise] their people when they return to them that they 
might be cautious.
123. o you who have believed, fight those adjacent to you of the 
disbelievers and let them find in you harshness.  and know 
that allah is with the righteous.
124. and whenever a surah is revealed, there are among them 
[i.e., the hypocrites] those who say, "which of you has this 
                                               
464thus it seemed to them in their extreme distress.
465in times of hardship.  rather, they should have been willing to endure 
with the prophet () whatever was necessary for islam.


juz 11
187
increased in faith?"  as for those who believed, it has increased
them in faith, while they are rejoicing.
125. but as for those in whose hearts is disease, it has [only] 
increased them in evil [in addition] to their evil.466  and they 
will have died while they are disbelievers.
126. do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice 
but then they do not repent nor do they remember?
127. and whenever a surah is revealed, they look at each other, 
[saying], "does anyone see you?" and then they dismiss 
themselves.  allah has dismissed their hearts because they are 
a people who do not understand.
128. there has certainly come to you a messenger from among 
yourselves.  grievous to him is what you suffer; [he is] 
concerned over you [i.e., your guidance] and to the believers 
is kind and merciful.
129. but if they turn away, [o muhammad], say, "sufficient for me 
is allah; there is no deity except him.  on him i have relied,
and he is the lord of the great throne."
                                               
466literally, "filth," i.e., disbelief and hypocrisy.


juz 11
188

467
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, rœ.468  these are the verses of the wise469 book.
2. have the people been amazed that we revealed [revelation] to a 
man from among them, [saying], "warn mankind and give good 
tidings to those who believe that they will have a [firm] precedence
of honor470 with their lord"?  [but] the disbelievers say, "indeed,
this is an obvious magician."
3. indeed, your lord is allah, who created the heavens and the earth
in six days and then established himself above the throne,471
arranging the matter [of his creation].  there is no intercessor
except after his permission.  that is allah, your lord, so worship
him.  then will you not remember?
4. to him is your return all together. [it is] the promise of allah 
[which is] truth.  indeed, he begins the [process of] creation and 
then repeats it that he may reward those who have believed and 
done righteous deeds, in justice.  but those who disbelieved will 
have a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment for what
they used to deny.
5. it is he who made the sun a shining light and the moon a 
derived light and determined for it phases – that you may know 
the number of years and account [of time].  allah has not created
this except in truth.  he details the signs for a people who know.
6. indeed, in the alternation of the night and the day and [in] what 
allah has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for a 
people who fear allah.
                                               
467yunus:  (the prophet) jonah.
468see footnote to 2:1.
469the adjective "wise" expresses the qualities of will, purpose, discrimination
and precision.
470i.e., a sure position due to their righteous deeds.
471see footnote to 2:19.


juz 11
189
7.
indeed, those who do not expect the meeting with us and are 
satisfied with the life of this world and feel secure therein and 
those who are heedless of our signs –
8.
for those their refuge will be the fire because of what they 
used to earn.
9.
indeed, those who have believed and done righteous deeds –
their lord will guide them because of their faith.  beneath 
them rivers will flow in the gardens of pleasure.
10.
their call therein will be, "exalted are you, o allah," and 
their greeting therein will be, "peace."  and the last of their 
call will be, "praise to allah, lord of the worlds!"
11.
and if allah was to hasten for the people the evil [they invoke]472
as he hastens for them the good, their term would have been 
ended for them.473  but we leave the ones who do not expect 
the meeting with us, in their transgression, wandering blindly.
12.
and when affliction touches man, he calls upon us, whether 
lying on his side or sitting or standing; but when we remove 
from him his affliction, he continues [in disobedience] as if he 
had never called upon us to [remove] an affliction that touched
him.  thus is made pleasing to the transgressors that which 
they have been doing.
13.
and we had already destroyed generations before you when 
they wronged, and their messengers had come to them with 
clear proofs, but they were not to believe.  thus do we 
recompense the criminal people.
14.
then we made you successors in the land after them so that 
we may observe how you will do.
15.
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
those who do not expect the meeting with us say, "bring us a 
quran other than this or change it."  say, [o muhammad], "it 
is not for me to change it on my own accord.  i only follow 
                                               
472in anger or in heedlessness.
473i.e., allah would have destroyed them on account of that.


juz 11
190
what is revealed to me.  indeed i fear, if i should disobey my 
lord, the punishment of a tremendous day."
16.
say, "if allah had willed, i would not have recited it to you, 
nor would he have made it known to you, for i had remained 
among you a lifetime before it.474  then will you not reason?"
17.
so who is more unjust than he who invents a lie about allah 
or denies his signs?  indeed, the criminals will not succeed.
18.
and they worship other than allah that which neither harms 
them nor benefits them, and they say, "these are our intercessors
with allah."  say, "do you inform allah of something he does 
not know in the heavens or on the earth?"  exalted is he and 
high above what they associate with him.
19.
and mankind was not but one community [united in religion], 
but [then] they differed.  and if not for a word475 that preceded
from your lord, it would have been judged between them 
[immediately] concerning that over which they differ.
20.
and they say, "why is a sign not sent down to him from his 
lord?"  so say, "the unseen is only for allah [to administer], 
so wait; indeed, i am with you among those who wait."
21.
and when we give the people a taste of mercy after adversity 
has touched them, at once they conspire against our verses.  
say, "allah is swifter in strategy."  indeed, our messengers 
[i.e., angels] record that which you conspire.
22.
it is he who enables you to travel on land and sea until, when 
you are in ships and they sail with them476 by a good wind and 
they rejoice therein, there comes a storm wind and the waves 
come upon them from everywhere and they assume that they 
are surrounded [i.e., doomed], supplicating allah, sincere to 
                                               
474the prophet () lived among his people forty years before receiving any 
revelation.
475allah's decree to allow time on earth for his creation or not to punish 
anyone before evidence has come to him.
476the change in pronoun from the second to third person shows that the 
following description applies specifically to the disbelievers.


juz 11
191
him in religion, "if you should save us from this, we will surely
be among the thankful."
23.
but when he saves them, at once they commit injustice477
upon the earth without right.  o mankind, your injustice is only
against yourselves, [being merely] the enjoyment of worldly 
life.  then to us is your return, and we will inform you of 
what you used to do.
24.
the example of [this] worldly life is but like rain which we 
have sent down from the sky that the plants of the earth 
absorb – [those] from which men and livestock eat – until, 
when the earth has taken on its adornment and is beautified 
and its people suppose that they have capability over it, there 
comes to it our command by night or by day, and we make it 
as a harvest,478 as if it had not flourished yesterday.  thus do 
we explain in detail the signs for a people who give thought.
25.
and allah invites to the home of peace [i.e., paradise] and 
guides whom he wills to a straight path.
26.
for them who have done good is the best [reward] – and extra.479  
no darkness will cover their faces, nor humiliation.  those are 
companions of paradise; they will abide therein eternally.
27.
but they who have earned [blame for] evil doings – the 
recompense of an evil deed is its equivalent, and humiliation 
will cover them.  they will have from allah no protector.  it 
will be as if their faces are covered with pieces of the night –
so dark [are they].  those are the companions of the fire; they 
will abide therein eternally.
28.
and [mention, o muhammad], the day we will gather them 
all together – then we will say to those who associated others 
with allah, "[remain in] your place, you and your 'partners.'"480  
                                               
477by oppression and disobedience or by invoking others besides allah.
478its vegetation having been cut down or uprooted, i.e., utterly destroyed.
479in addition to the pleasures of paradise, they will be able to see allah 
(subhanahu wa taala), as reported in an authentic hadith narrated by muslim.
480those they had associated with allah.


juz 11
192
then we will separate them,481 and their "partners" will say, 
"you did not used to worship us,482
29.
and sufficient is allah as a witness between us and you that 
we were of your worship unaware."
30.
there, [on that day], every soul will be put to trial for what it 
did previously, and they will be returned to allah, their master,
the truth, and lost from them is whatever they used to invent.
31.
say, "who provides for you from the heaven and the earth?  
or who controls hearing and sight and who brings the living 
out of the dead and brings the dead out of the living and who 
arranges [every] matter?"  they will say, "allah," so say, 
"then will you not fear him?"
32.
for that is allah, your lord, the truth.  and what can be 
beyond truth except error?  so how are you averted?
33.
thus the word [i.e., decree] of your lord has come into effect 
upon those who defiantly disobeyed – that they will not believe.
34.
say, "are there of your 'partners' any who begins creation and 
then repeats it?"  say, "allah begins creation and then repeats 
it, so how are you deluded?"
35.
say, "are there of your 'partners' any who guides to the truth?"  
say, "allah guides to the truth.  so is he who guides to the truth
more worthy to be followed or he who guides not unless he is
guided?  then what is [wrong] with you – how do you judge?"
36.
and most of them follow not except assumption.  indeed, 
assumption avails not against the truth at all.  indeed, allah is 
knowing of what they do.
37.
and it was not [possible] for this quran to be produced by 
other than allah, but [it is] a confirmation of what was before 
it and a detailed explanation of the [former] scripture, about 
                                               
481from the believers.
482the inanimate objects, such as idols, will not have been aware of their 
worship of them.  but those beings who consented to be worshipped will 
lie and deny it on the day of judgement.


juz 11
193
which there is no doubt,483 from the lord of the worlds.
38.
or do they say [about the prophet ()], "he invented it?"  
say, "then bring forth a surah like it and call upon [for assistance]
whomever you can besides allah, if you should be truthful."
39.
rather, they have denied that which they encompass not in 
knowledge and whose interpretation has not yet come to them.  
thus did those before them deny.  then observe how was the 
end of the wrongdoers.
40.
and of them are those who believe in it, and of them are those 
who do not believe in it.  and your lord is most knowing of 
the corrupters.
41.
and if they deny you, [o muhammad], then say, "for me are 
my deeds, and for you are your deeds.  you are disassociated 
from what i do, and i am disassociated from what you do."
42.
and among them are those who listen to you.  but can you 
cause the deaf to hear [i.e., benefit from this hearing], although
they will not use reason?
43.
and among them are those who look at you.  but can you guide
the blind although they will not [attempt to] see?
44.
indeed, allah does not wrong the people at all, but it is the 
people who are wronging themselves.
45.
and on the day when he will gather them, [it will be] as if 
they had not remained [in the world] but an hour of the day, 
[and] they will know each other.  those will have lost who 
denied the meeting with allah and were not guided.
46.
and whether we show you some of what we promise them, 
[o muhammad], or we take you in death, to us is their return;
then, [either way], allah is a witness concerning what they are 
doing.
47.
and for every nation is a messenger.  so when their messenger
comes,484 it will be judged between them in justice, and they 
                                               
483this phrase refers back to the quran.
484to witness on the day of judgement.  another meaning is "once a messenger
has come [to them in this world]..."


juz 11
194
will not be wronged.
48.
and they say, "when is [the fulfillment of] this promise, if 
you should be truthful?"
49.
say, "i possess not for myself any harm or benefit except what 
allah should will.  for every nation is a [specified] term.  
when their time has come, then they will not remain behind 
an hour, nor will they precede [it]."
50.
say, "have you considered:  if his punishment should come 
to you by night or by day – for which [aspect] of it would the 
criminals be impatient?"485
51.
then is it that when it has [actually] occurred you will believe 
in it?  now?486  and you were [once] for it impatient.487
52.
then it will be said to those who had wronged, "taste the 
punishment of eternity; are you being recompensed except for 
what you used to earn?"
53.
and they ask information of you, [o muhammad], "is it true?"  
say, "yes, by my lord.  indeed, it is truth; and you will not 
cause failure [to allah]."
54.
and if each soul that wronged had everything on earth, it 
would offer it in ransom.  and they will confide regret when 
they see the punishment; and they will be judged in justice, 
and they will not be wronged.
55.
unquestionably, to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens 
and the earth.  unquestionably, the promise of allah is truth, 
but most of them do not know.
56.
he gives life and causes death, and to him you will be returned.
57.
o mankind, there has come to you instruction from your lord 
and healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and mercy 
for the believers.
                                               
485"impatience" refers to the disbelievers' ridicule of the prophet () by 
telling him to produce allah's punishment as proof of his truthfulness.
486i.e., when it is too late to benefit from belief.
487challenging those who warned of it to bring it on immediately.


juz 11
195
58.
say, "in the bounty of allah and in his mercy – in that let 
them rejoice; it is better than what they accumulate."
59.
say, "have you seen what allah has sent down to you of 
provision of which you have made [some] lawful and [some] 
unlawful?"  say, "has allah permitted you [to do so], or do 
you invent [something] about allah?"
60.
and what will be the supposition of those who invent falsehood
about allah on the day of resurrection?488  indeed, allah is 
full of bounty to the people, but most of them are not grateful.
61.
and, [o muhammad], you are not [engaged] in any matter or 
recite any of the quran and you [people] do not do any deed 
except that we are witness over you when you are involved in 
it.  and not absent from your lord is any [part] of an atom's 
weight489 within the earth or within the heaven or [anything] 
smaller than that or greater but that it is in a clear register.
62.
unquestionably, [for] the allies of allah there will be no fear 
concerning them, nor will they grieve –
63.
those who believed and were fearing allah.
64.
for them are good tidings in the worldly life and in the hereafter.  
no change is there in the words [i.e., decrees] of allah.  that 
is what is the great attainment.
65.
and let not their speech grieve you.  indeed, honor [due to power] 
belongs to allah entirely.  he is the hearing, the knowing.
66.
unquestionably, to allah belongs whoever is in the heavens 
and whoever is on the earth.  and those who invoke other than 
allah do not [actually] follow [his] "partners."  they follow 
not except assumption, and they are not but falsifying.
67.
it is he who made for you the night to rest therein and the day,
giving sight.490  indeed in that are signs for a people who listen.
                                               
488i.e., what do they think he will do with them.
489or "the weight of a small ant."
490i.e., making things visible.


juz 11
196
68.
they491 have said, "allah has taken a son."  exalted is he; he 
is the [one] free of need.  to him belongs whatever is in the 
heavens and whatever is in the earth.  you have no authority 
for this [claim].  do you say about allah that which you do 
not know?
69.
say, "indeed, those who invent falsehood about allah will not 
succeed."
70.
[for them is brief] enjoyment in this world; then to us is their 
return; then we will make them taste the severe punishment 
because they used to disbelieve.
71.
and recite to them the news of noah, when he said to his people,
"o my people, if my residence and my reminding of the signs 
of allah has become burdensome upon you – then i have 
relied upon allah.  so resolve upon your plan and [call upon] 
your associates.  then let not your plan be obscure to you.492  
then carry it out upon me and do not give me respite.
72.
and if you turn away [from my advice] – then no payment 
have i asked of you.  my reward is only from allah, and i have
been commanded to be of the muslims [i.e., those who submit 
to allah]."
73.
and they denied him, so we saved him and those with him in 
the ship and made them successors, and we drowned those 
who denied our signs.  then see how was the end of those who 
were warned.
74.
then we sent after him messengers to their peoples, and they 
came to them with clear proofs.  but they were not to believe 
in that which they had denied before.493  thus we seal over
the hearts of the transgressors.
75.
then we sent after them moses and aaron to pharaoh and his 
                                               
491the christians and others.
492i.e., do not let it be a source of doubt or anxiety to you but let it be clear, 
open and defined.
493i.e., the succeeding generations were persistent in disbelief.


juz 11
197
establishment with our signs, but they behaved arrogantly and 
were a criminal people.
76.
so when there came to them the truth from us, they said, 
"indeed, this is obvious magic."
77.
moses said, "do you say [thus] about the truth when it has 
come to you?  is this magic?  but magicians will not succeed."
78.
they said, "have you come to us to turn us away from that 
upon which we found our fathers and so that you two may 
have grandeur in the land?  and we are not believers in you."
79.
and pharaoh said, "bring to me every learned magician."
80.
so when the magicians came, moses said to them, "throw down
whatever you will throw."
81.
and when they had thrown, moses said, "what you have brought
is [only] magic.  indeed, allah will expose its worthlessness.  
indeed, allah does not amend the work of corrupters.
82.
and allah will establish the truth by his words, even if the 
criminals dislike it."
83.
but no one believed moses, except [some] offspring [i.e., youths]
among his people, for fear of pharaoh and his establishment that 
they would persecute them.  and indeed, pharaoh was haughty
within the land, and indeed, he was of the transgressors.
84.
and moses said, "o my people, if you have believed in allah, 
then rely upon him, if you should be muslims [i.e., submitting
to him]."
85.
so they said, "upon allah do we rely.  our lord, make us not 
[objects of] trial for the wrongdoing people
86.
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people."
87.
and we inspired to moses and his brother, "settle your people
in egypt in houses and make your houses [facing the] qiblah494
and establish prayer and give good tidings to the believers."
                                               
494in order that they might pray therein unseen by their enemy.


juz 11
198
88.
and moses said, "our lord, indeed you have given pharaoh 
and his establishment splendor and wealth in the worldly life, 
our lord, that they may lead [men] astray from your way.  
our lord, obliterate their wealth and harden their hearts so that 
they will not believe until they see the painful punishment."
89.
[allah] said, "your supplication has been answered."495  so 
remain on a right course and follow not the way of those who 
do not know."
90.
and we took the children of israel across the sea, and pharaoh
and his soldiers pursued them in tyranny and enmity until, 
when drowning overtook him, he said, "i believe that there is 
no deity except that in whom the children of israel believe, 
and i am of the muslims."
91.
now?  and you had disobeyed [him] before and were of the 
corrupters?
92.
so today we will save you in body496 that you may be to those 
who succeed you a sign.  and indeed, many among the people, 
of our signs, are heedless.
93.
and we had certainly settled the children of israel in an 
agreeable settlement and provided them with good things.  and
they did not differ until [after] knowledge had come to them.  
indeed, your lord will judge between them on the day of 
resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ.
94.
so if you are in doubt, [o muhammad], about that which we 
have revealed to you, then ask those who have been reading 
the scripture before you.  the truth has certainly come to you 
from your lord, so never be among the doubters.
95.
and never be of those who deny the signs of allah and [thus] 
be among the losers.497
                                               
495literally, "the supplication of both of you," i.e., that of moses and of 
aaron, who joined by saying, "ameen" ("o allah, respond").
496i.e., his dead body will be preserved and not destroyed.
497among the interpretations of the last two verses is that they were meant 
to stir the prophet () to declare and confirm his certainty, which he did.  
another is that although the words are addressed to the prophet (), they 
are directed to all people.


juz 11
199
96. indeed, those upon whom the word [i.e., decree] of your lord 
has come into effect will not believe,
97. even if every sign should come to them, until they see the 
painful punishment.
98. then has there not been a [single] city that believed so its faith
benefited it except the people of jonah?  when they believed, 
we removed from them the punishment of disgrace in worldly 
life and gave them enjoyment [i.e., provision] for a time.
99. and had your lord willed, those on earth would have believed –
all of them entirely.  then, [o muhammad], would you compel
the people in order that they become believers?
100. and it is not for a soul [i.e., anyone] to believe except by 
permission of allah, and he will place defilement498 upon 
those who will not use reason.
101. say, "observe what is in the heavens and the earth."  but of no 
avail will be signs or warners to a people who do not believe.
102. so do they wait except for like [what occurred in] the days of 
those who passed on before them?  say, "then wait; indeed, i 
am with you among those who wait."
103. then we will save our messengers and those who have believed.  
thus, it is an obligation upon us that we save the believers.499
104. say, [o muhammad], "o people, if you are in doubt as to my 
religion – then i do not worship those which you worship 
besides allah; but i worship allah, who causes your death.  
and i have been commanded to be of the believers
105. and [commanded], 'direct your face [i.e., self] toward the 
religion, inclining to truth, and never be of those who associate
others with allah;
106. and do not invoke besides allah that which neither benefits 
                                               
498among its meanings are filth, wrath, punishment, disbelief, confusion 
and error.
499from allah's punishment.


juz 11
200
you nor harms you, for if you did, then indeed you would be 
of the wrongdoers.'"500
107. and if allah should touch you with adversity, there is no 
remover of it except him; and if he intends for you good, 
then there is no repeller of his bounty.  he causes it to reach 
whom he wills of his servants.  and he is the forgiving, the 
merciful.
108. say, "o mankind, the truth has come to you from your lord, 
so whoever is guided is only guided for [the benefit of] his 
soul, and whoever goes astray only goes astray [in violation] 
against it.  and i am not over you a manager."
109. and follow what is revealed to you, [o muhammad], and be 
patient until allah will judge.  and he is the best of judges.
                                               
500see footnote to 10:95.


juz 12
201

501
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, rœ.502  [this is] a book whose verses are perfected 
and then presented in detail from [one who is] wise and acquainted
2. [through a messenger, saying], "do not worship except allah.  
indeed, i am to you from him a warner and a bringer of good 
tidings,"
3. and [saying], "seek forgiveness of your lord and repent to him,
[and] he will let you enjoy a good provision for a specified 
term and give every doer of favor his favor [i.e., reward].  but if 
you turn away, then indeed, i fear for you the punishment of a 
great day.
4. to allah is your return, and he is over all things competent."
5. unquestionably, they [i.e., the disbelievers] turn away their breasts 
to hide themselves from him.  unquestionably, [even] when they
cover themselves in their clothing, he [i.e., allah] knows what 
they conceal and what they declare.  indeed, he is knowing of 
that within the breasts.
6. and there is no creature on earth but that upon allah is its provision,
and he knows its place of dwelling and place of storage.503  all 
is in a clear register.
7. and it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days –
and his throne had been upon water – that he might test you as 
to which of you is best in deed.  but if you say, "indeed, you are 
resurrected after death," those who disbelieve will surely say, 
"this is not but obvious magic."
8. and if we hold back from them the punishment for a limited time,
they will surely say,504 "what detains it?"  unquestionably, on 
                                               
501hud:  (the prophet) hud.
502see footnote to 2:1.
503before birth and after death.
504in ridicule and disbelief.


juz 12
202
the day it comes to them, it will not be averted from them, 
and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
9.
and if we give man a taste of mercy from us and then we 
withdraw it from him, indeed, he is despairing and ungrateful.
10.
but if we give him a taste of favor after hardship has touched 
him, he will surely say, "bad times have left me."  indeed, he 
is exultant and boastful –
11.
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds; those 
will have forgiveness and great reward.
12.
then would you possibly leave [out] some of what is revealed 
to you,505 or is your breast constrained by it because they say, 
"why has there not been sent down to him a treasure or come 
with him an angel?"  but you are only a warner.  and allah is
disposer of all things.
13.
or do they say, "he invented it"?  say, "then bring ten surahs 
like it that have been invented and call upon [for assistance] 
whomever you can besides allah, if you should be truthful."
14.
and if they do not respond to you – then know that it [i.e., the 
quran] was revealed with the knowledge of allah506 and that 
there is no deity except him.  then,507 would you [not] be 
muslims?
15.
whoever desires the life of this world and its adornments –
we fully repay them for their deeds therein,508 and they therein
will not be deprived.
16.
those are the ones for whom there is not in the hereafter but 
the fire.  and lost is what they did therein,509 and worthless is 
what they used to do.
                                               
505knowing of the prophet's difficulties, allah (subhanahu wa taala) urges 
him to patience, certain that he would not fail to convey the message in 
its entirety.
506i.e., that knowledge which no one possesses except him (subhanahu wa taala).
507after having been convinced by such evidence.
508i.e., during worldly life.
509i.e., during worldly life.


juz 12
203
17.
so is one who [stands] upon a clear evidence from his lord 
[like the aforementioned]?  and a witness510 from him follows
it,511 and before it was the scripture of moses to lead and as 
mercy.  those [believers in the former revelations] believe in 
it [i.e., the quran].  but whoever disbelieves in it from the 
[various] factions – the fire is his promised destination.  so be 
not in doubt about it.  indeed, it is the truth from your lord, 
but most of the people do not believe.
18.
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie about allah?  
those will be presented before their lord, and the witnesses 
will say, "these are the ones who lied against their lord."  
unquestionably, the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers
19.
who averted [people] from the way of allah and sought to 
make it [seem] deviant while they, concerning the hereafter, 
were disbelievers.
20.
those were not causing failure [to allah] on earth, nor did they
have besides allah any protectors.  for them the punishment 
will be multiplied.  they were not able to hear, nor did they 
see.512
21.
those are the ones who will have lost themselves, and lost 
from them is what they used to invent.
22.
assuredly, it is they in the hereafter who will be the greatest 
losers.
23.
indeed, they who have believed and done righteous deeds and 
humbled themselves to their lord – those are the companions 
of paradise; they will abide eternally therein.
24.
the example of the two parties is like the blind and deaf, and 
the seeing and hearing.  are they equal in comparison?  then, 
will you not remember?
25.
and we had certainly sent noah to his people, [saying], 
"indeed, i am to you a clear warner
                                               
510referring to prophet muhammad () or to the angel gabriel.
511testifying to its truth.  additionally, it can mean "recites it," i.e., the quran.
512they refused to listen to the truth or to perceive it.


juz 12
204
26.
that you not worship except allah.  indeed, i fear for you the 
punishment of a painful day."
27.
so the eminent among those who disbelieved from his people 
said, "we do not see you but as a man like ourselves, and we 
do not see you followed except by those who are the lowest of 
us [and] at first suggestion.513  and we do not see in you over 
us any merit; rather, we think you are liars."
28.
he said, "o my people, have you considered:  if i should be 
upon clear evidence from my lord while he has given me 
mercy from himself but it has been made unapparent to you, 
should we force it upon you while you are averse to it?
29.
and o my people, i ask not of you for it any wealth.  my 
reward is not but from allah.  and i am not one to drive away 
those who have believed.  indeed, they will meet their lord, 
but i see that you are a people behaving ignorantly.
30.
and o my people, who would protect me from allah if i 
drove them away?  then will you not be reminded?
31.
and i do not tell you that i have the depositories [containing 
the provision] of allah or that i know the unseen, nor do i tell 
you that i am an angel, nor do i say of those upon whom your 
eyes look down that allah will never grant them any good.  
allah is most knowing of what is within their souls.  indeed, i 
would then be among the wrongdoers [i.e., the unjust]."
32.
they said, "o noah, you have disputed [i.e., opposed] us and 
been frequent in dispute of us.  so bring us what you threaten 
us, if you should be of the truthful."
33.
he said, "allah will only bring it to you if he wills, and you 
will not cause [him] failure.
34.
and my advice will not benefit you – although i wished to 
advise you – if allah should intend to put you in error.  he is 
your lord, and to him you will be returned."
                                               
513i.e., without any thought or hesitation.


juz 12
205
35.
or do they say [about prophet muhammad ()], "he invented
it"?  say, "if i have invented it, then upon me is [the consequence
of] my crime; but i am innocent of what [crimes] you commit."
36.
and it was revealed to noah that, "no one will believe from 
your people except those who have already believed, so do not 
be distressed by what they have been doing.
37.
and construct the ship under our observation and our inspiration
and do not address me concerning those who have wronged; 
indeed, they are [to be] drowned."
38.
and he constructed the ship, and whenever an assembly of the 
eminent of his people passed by him, they ridiculed him.  he 
said, "if you ridicule us, then we will ridicule you just as you 
ridicule.
39.
and you are going to know who will get a punishment that 
will disgrace him [on earth] and upon whom will descend an 
enduring punishment [in the hereafter]."
40.
[so it was], until when our command came and the oven 
overflowed,514 we said, "load upon it [i.e., the ship] of each 
[creature] two mates and your family, except those about whom
the word [i.e., decree] has preceded, and [include] whoever 
has believed."  but none had believed with him, except a few.
41.
and [noah] said, "embark therein; in the name of allah is its 
course and its anchorage.  indeed, my lord is forgiving and 
merciful."
42.
and it sailed with them through waves like mountains, and 
noah called to his son who was apart [from them], "o my son, 
come aboard with us and be not with the disbelievers."
43.
[but] he said, "i will take refuge on a mountain to protect me 
from the water."  [noah] said, "there is no protector today from 
the decree of allah, except for whom he gives mercy."  and the 
waves came between them, and he was among the drowned.
                                               
514as a sign to noah of the imminence of the flood.  the tannur is a large, 
rounded oven.  the word can also mean the earth's lowlands.


juz 12
206
44.
and it was said, "o earth, swallow your water, and o sky, 
withhold [your rain]."  and the water subsided, and the matter 
was accomplished, and it [i.e., the ship] came to rest on the 
[mountain of] judiyy.  and it was said, "away with the 
wrongdoing people."
45.
and noah called to his lord and said, "my lord, indeed my 
son is of my family; and indeed, your promise is true; and 
you are the most just of judges!"
46.
he said, "o noah, indeed he is not of your family; indeed, he 
is [one whose] work was other than righteous, so ask me not 
for that about which you have no knowledge.  indeed, i advise 
you, lest you be among the ignorant."
47.
[noah] said, "my lord, i seek refuge in you from asking that 
of which i have no knowledge.  and unless you forgive me 
and have mercy upon me, i will be among the losers."
48.
it was said, "o noah, disembark in security from us and blessings
upon you and upon nations [descending] from those with you.  
but other nations [of them] we will grant enjoyment; then 
there will touch them from us a painful punishment."
49.
that is from the news of the unseen which we reveal to you, 
[o muhammad].  you knew it not, neither you nor your people,
before this.  so be patient; indeed, the [best] outcome is for 
the righteous.
50.
and to aad [we sent] their brother hud.  he said, "o my people,
worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  you are 
not but inventors [of falsehood].
51.
o my people, i do not ask you for it [i.e., my advice] any 
reward.  my reward is only from the one who created me.  
then will you not reason?
52.
and o my people, ask forgiveness of your lord and then 
repent to him.  he will send [rain from] the sky upon you in 
showers and increase you in strength [added] to your strength.  
and do not turn away, [being] criminals."


juz 12
207
53.
they said, "o hud, you have not brought us clear evidence, 
and we are not ones to leave our gods on your say-so.  nor are 
we believers in you.
54.
we only say that some of our gods have possessed you with 
evil [i.e., insanity]."  he said, "indeed, i call allah to witness, 
and witness [yourselves] that i am free from whatever you 
associate with allah
55.
other than him.  so plot against me all together; then do not 
give me respite.
56.
indeed, i have relied upon allah, my lord and your lord.  
there is no creature but that he holds its forelock [i.e., 
controls it].  indeed, my lord is on a path [that is] straight."
57.
but if they turn away, [say], "i have already conveyed that 
with which i was sent to you.  my lord will give succession 
to a people other than you, and you will not harm him at all.  
indeed my lord is, over all things, guardian."
58.
and when our command came, we saved hud and those who 
believed with him, by mercy from us; and we saved them 
from a harsh punishment.
59.
and that was aad, who rejected the signs of their lord and 
disobeyed his messengers and followed the order of every 
obstinate tyrant.
60.
and they were [therefore] followed in this world with a curse 
and [as well] on the day of resurrection.  unquestionably, 
aad denied their lord; then away with aad, the people of hud.
61.
and to thamud [we sent] their brother salih.  he said, "o my 
people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  he 
has produced you from the earth and settled you in it, so ask 
forgiveness of him and then repent to him.  indeed, my lord 
is near and responsive."
62.
they said, "o salih, you were among us a man of promise 
before this.  do you forbid us to worship what our fathers 
worshipped?  and indeed we are, about that to which you invite
us, in disquieting doubt."


juz 12
208
63.
he said, "o my people, have you considered:  if i should be 
upon clear evidence from my lord and he has given me 
mercy from himself, who would protect me from allah if i 
disobeyed him?  so you would not increase me except in loss.
64.
and o my people, this is the she-camel of allah – [she is] to 
you a sign.  so let her feed upon allah's earth and do not touch
her with harm, or you will be taken by an impending punishment."
65.
but they hamstrung her, so he said, "enjoy yourselves in your 
homes for three days.  that is a promise not to be denied [i.e., 
unfailing]."
66.
so when our command came, we saved salih and those who 
believed with him, by mercy from us, and [saved them] from 
the disgrace of that day.515  indeed, it is your lord who is the 
powerful, the exalted in might.
67.
and the shriek516 seized those who had wronged, and they 
became within their homes [corpses] fallen prone
68.
as if they had never prospered therein.  unquestionably, 
thamud denied their lord; then, away with thamud.
69.
and certainly did our messengers [i.e., angels] come to ibrahim
with good tidings; they said, "peace."  he said, "peace," and 
did not delay in bringing [them] a roasted calf.
70.
but when he saw their hands not reaching for it, he distrusted 
them and felt from them apprehension.517  they said, "fear 
not.  we have been sent to the people of lot."
71.
and his wife was standing, and she smiled.518  then we gave 
her good tidings of isaac and after isaac, jacob.
72.
she said, "woe to me!519  shall i give birth while i am an old 
                                               
515the day of thamud's destruction.
516a piercing cry or blast from the sky.
517traditionally, if a guest refused to eat, it meant that he harbored ill will 
toward the host or intended him harm.
518in pleasure at the news of the forthcoming punishment of the evil people 
who denied prophet lot (upon him be peace).
519an expression of surprise and amazement.


juz 12
209
woman and this, my husband, is an old man?  indeed, this is 
an amazing thing!"
73.
they said, "are you amazed at the decree of allah?  may the 
mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you, people of the 
house.  indeed, he is praiseworthy and honorable."
74.
and when the fright had left ibrahim and the good tidings 
had reached him, he began to argue [i.e., plead] with us520
concerning the people of lot.
75.
indeed, ibrahim was forbearing, grieving521 and [frequently] 
returning [to allah].
76.
[the angels said], "o ibrahim, give up this [plea].  indeed, 
the command of your lord has come, and indeed, there will 
reach them a punishment that cannot be repelled."
77.
and when our messengers, [the angels], came to lot, he was 
anguished for them and felt for them great discomfort522 and 
said, "this is a trying day."
78.
and his people came hastening to him, and before [this] they 
had been doing evil deeds.523  he said, "o my people, these 
are my daughters;524 they are purer for you.  so fear allah and 
do not disgrace me concerning my guests.  is there not among 
you a man of reason?"
79.
they said, "you have already known that we have not concerning
your daughters [i.e., women] any claim [i.e., desire], and indeed, 
you know what we want."
80.
he said, "if only i had against you some power or could take 
refuge in a strong support."
81.
they [the angels] said, "o lot, indeed we are messengers of 
your lord; [therefore], they will never reach you.  so set out 
                                               
520i.e., with our angels.
521i.e., sighing or moaning during supplication out of grief for people and 
fear of allah.
522prophet lot feared for the safety and honor of his guests.
523referring to their practice of sodomy and homosexual rape of males.
524i.e., the women of his community who were available for marriage.


juz 12
210
with your family during a portion of the night525 and let not 
any among you look back – except your wife; indeed, she will
be struck by that which strikes them.  indeed, their appointment
is [for] the morning.  is not the morning near?"
82.
so when our command came, we made the highest part [of 
the city] its lowest and rained upon them stones of layered 
hard clay, [which were]
83.
marked from your lord.  and it [i.e., allah's punishment] is 
not from the wrongdoers [very] far.
84.
and to madyan [we sent] their brother shuayb.  he said, "o 
my people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him.  
and do not decrease from the measure and the scale.  indeed, 
i see you in prosperity, but indeed, i fear for you the punishment
of an all-encompassing day.
85.
and o my people, give full measure and weight in justice and 
do not deprive the people of their due and do not commit 
abuse on the earth, spreading corruption.
86.
what remains [lawful] from allah is best for you, if you would
be believers.  but i am not a guardian over you."
87.
they said, "o shuayb, does your prayer [i.e., religion] 
command you that we should leave what our fathers worship 
or not do with our wealth what we please?  indeed, you are 
the forbearing, the discerning!"526
88.
he said, "o my people, have you considered:  if i am upon 
clear evidence from my lord and he has provided me with a 
good provision from him...?527  and i do not intend to differ 
from you in that which i have forbidden you; i only intend 
reform as much as i am able.  and my success is not but
through allah.  upon him i have relied, and to him i return.528
                                               
525i.e., sometime before dawn.
526this is a sarcastic description implying the opposite.
527the conclusion of the sentence is estimated as "...would it not be my duty 
to warn you against corruption and disobedience?"
528i.e., i turn to allah frequently in supplication and repentance.


juz 12
211
89.
and o my people, let not [your] dissension from me cause 
you to be struck by that similar to what struck the people of 
noah or the people of hud or the people of salih.  and the 
people of lot are not from you far away.
90.
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then repent to him.  
indeed, my lord is merciful and affectionate."
91.
they said, "o shuayb, we do not understand much of what 
you say, and indeed, we consider you among us as weak.  and 
if not for your family, we would have stoned you [to death]; 
and you are not to us one respected."
92.
he said, "o my people, is my family more respected for power
by you than allah?  but you put him behind your backs [in 
neglect].  indeed, my lord is encompassing of what you do.
93.
and o my people, work according to your position; indeed, i 
am working.  you are going to know to whom will come a 
punishment that will disgrace him and who is a liar.  so watch;
indeed, i am with you a watcher, [awaiting the outcome]."
94.
and when our command came, we saved shuayb and those 
who believed with him, by mercy from us.  and the shriek 
seized those who had wronged, and they became within their 
homes [corpses] fallen prone
95.
as if they had never prospered therein.  then, away with madyan
as thamud was taken away.
96.
and we did certainly send moses with our signs and a clear 
authority
97.
to pharaoh and his establishment, but they followed the 
command of pharaoh, and the command of pharaoh was not 
[at all] discerning.
98.
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection and 
lead them into the fire; and wretched is the place to which 
they are led.
99.
and they were followed in this [world] with a curse and on the
day of resurrection.  and wretched is the gift529 which is given.
                                               
529i.e., the curse which follows them in both worlds.


juz 12
212
100. that is from the news of the cities, which we relate to you; of 
them, some are [still] standing and some are [as] a harvest 
[mowed down].530
101. and we did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves.  
and they were not availed at all by their gods which they 
invoked other than allah when there came the command of 
your lord.  and they did not increase them in other than ruin.
102. and thus is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the cities 
while they are committing wrong.  indeed, his seizure is painful
and severe.
103. indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of 
the hereafter.  that is a day for which the people will be 
collected, and that is a day [which will be] witnessed.
104. and we do not delay it except for a limited term.
105. the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission.  
and among them will be the wretched and the prosperous.
106. as for those who were [destined to be] wretched, they will be 
in the fire.  for them therein is [violent] exhaling and inhaling.531
107. [they will be] abiding therein as long as the heavens and the 
earth endure, except what your lord should will.  indeed, your 
lord is an effecter of what he intends.
108. and as for those who were [destined to be] prosperous, they 
will be in paradise, abiding therein as long as the heavens and 
the earth endure, except what your lord should will – a 
bestowal uninterrupted.
109. so do not be in doubt, [o muhammad], as to what these 
[polytheists] are worshipping.  they worship not except as 
their fathers worshipped before.  and indeed, we will give 
them their share undiminished.
110. and we had certainly given moses the scripture, but it came 
                                               
530their structures have been completely destroyed.
531i.e., their sighs and sobs, resembling the bray of a donkey.


juz 12
213
under disagreement.  and if not for a word532 that preceded 
from your lord, it would have been judged between them.  
and indeed they are, concerning it [i.e., the quran], in 
disquieting doubt.
111. and indeed, each [of the believers and disbelievers] – your 
lord will fully compensate them for their deeds.  indeed, he 
is acquainted with what they do.
112. so remain on a right course as you have been commanded, 
[you] and those who have turned back with you [to allah], 
and do not transgress.  indeed, he is seeing of what you do.
113. and do not incline toward those who do wrong, lest you be 
touched by the fire, and you would not have other than allah 
any protectors; then you would not be helped.
114. and establish prayer at the two ends of the day and at the 
approach of the night.  indeed, good deeds do away with 
misdeeds.  that is a reminder for those who remember.
115. and be patient, for indeed, allah does not allow to be lost the 
reward of those who do good.
116. so why were there not533 among the generations before you 
those of enduring discrimination forbidding corruption on 
earth – except a few of those we saved from among them?  
but those who wronged pursued what luxury they were given 
therein, and they were criminals.
117. and your lord would not have destroyed the cities unjustly 
while their people were reformers.
118. and if your lord had willed, he could have made mankind 
one community; but they will not cease to differ,
119. except whom your lord has given mercy, and for that he 
created them.  but the word of your lord is to be fulfilled that, 
"i will surely fill hell with jinn and men all together."
                                               
532see footnote to 10:19.
533meaning "if only there had been..."


juz 12
214
120. and each [story] we relate to you from the news of the 
messengers is that by which we make firm your heart.  and 
there has come to you, in this, the truth and an instruction and 
a reminder for the believers.
121. and say to those who do not believe, "work according to your 
position; indeed, we are working.
122. and wait; indeed, we are waiting."
123. and to allah belong the unseen [aspects] of the heavens and 
the earth and to him will be returned the matter, all of it, so 
worship him and rely upon him.  and your lord is not 
unaware of that which you do.


juz 12
215

534
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, rœ.535  these are the verses of the clear book.
2. indeed, we have sent it down as an arabic quran536 that you 
might understand.
3. we relate to you, [o muhammad], the best of stories in what 
we have revealed to you of this quran although you were, 
before it, among the unaware.
4. [of these stories mention] when joseph said to his father,537 "o 
my father, indeed i have seen [in a dream] eleven stars and the 
sun and the moon; i saw them prostrating to me."
5. he said, "o my son, do not relate your vision to your brothers 
or they will contrive against you a plan.  indeed satan, to man, 
is a manifest enemy.
6. and thus will your lord choose you and teach you the interpretation
of narratives [i.e., events or dreams] and complete his favor upon
you and upon the family of jacob, as he completed it upon your 
fathers before, ibrahim and isaac.  indeed, your lord is knowing
and wise."
7. certainly were there in joseph and his brothers signs for those 
who ask, [such as]
8. when they said, "joseph and his brother538 are more beloved to 
our father than we, while we are a clan.  indeed, our father is in 
clear error.
9. kill joseph or cast him out to [another] land; the countenance 
[i.e., attention] of your father will [then] be only for you, and 
you will be after that a righteous people."539
                                               
534yusuf:  (the prophet) joseph.
535see footnote to 2:1.
536i.e., revealed in the arabic language.
537the prophet jacob (upon whom be peace).
538benjamin, who was born of the same mother as joseph.
539i.e., you can repent thereafter.


juz 12
216
10.
said a speaker among them, "do not kill joseph but throw him 
into the bottom of the well; some travelers will pick him up –
if you would do [something]."
11.
they said, "o our father, why do you not entrust us with joseph
while indeed, we are to him sincere counselors?
12.
send him with us tomorrow that he may eat well and play.  
and indeed, we will be his guardians."
13.
[jacob] said, "indeed, it saddens me that you should take him, 
and i fear that a wolf would eat him while you are of him 
unaware."
14.
they said, "if a wolf should eat him while we are a [strong] 
clan, indeed, we would then be losers."
15.
so when they took him [out] and agreed to put him into the 
bottom of the well...540  but we inspired to him, "you will 
surely inform them [someday] about this affair of theirs while 
they do not perceive [your identity]."
16.
and they came to their father at night, weeping.
17.
they said, "o our father, indeed we went racing each other and
left joseph with our possessions, and a wolf ate him.  but you 
would not believe us, even if we were truthful."
18.
and they brought upon his shirt false blood.541  [jacob] said, 
"rather, your souls have enticed you to something, so patience
is most fitting.  and allah is the one sought for help against 
that which you describe."
19.
and there came a company of travelers; then they sent their 
water drawer, and he let down his bucket.  he said, "good news!  
here is a boy."  and they concealed him, [taking him] as 
merchandise;542 and allah was knowing of what they did.
                                               
540the conclusion of this sentence is estimated to be "...they tormented him."
541they had stained joseph's shirt with the blood of a lamb but had forgotten 
to tear it, thereby arousing their father's suspicion.
542to be sold as a slave.


juz 12
217
20.
and they sold him for a reduced price – a few dirhams – and 
they were, concerning him, of those content with little.
21.
and the one from egypt543 who bought him said to his wife, 
"make his residence comfortable.  perhaps he will benefit us, 
or we will adopt him as a son."  and thus, we established 
joseph in the land that we might teach him the interpretation 
of events [i.e., dreams].  and allah is predominant over his 
affair, but most of the people do not know.
22.
and when he [i.e., joseph] reached maturity, we gave him 
judgement and knowledge.  and thus we reward the doers of 
good.
23.
and she, in whose house he was, sought to seduce him.  she 
closed the doors and said, "come, you."  he said, "[i seek] the 
refuge of allah.  indeed, he544 is my master, who has made 
good my residence.  indeed, wrongdoers will not succeed."
24.
and she certainly determined [to seduce] him, and he would 
have inclined to her had he not seen the proof [i.e., sign] of his 
lord.  and thus [it was] that we should avert from him evil 
and immorality.  indeed, he was of our chosen servants.
25.
and they both raced to the door, and she tore his shirt from 
the back, and they found her husband at the door.  she said, 
"what is the recompense of one who intended evil for your 
wife but that he be imprisoned or a painful punishment?"
26.
[joseph] said, "it was she who sought to seduce me."  and a 
witness from her family testified, "if his shirt is torn from the 
front, then she has told the truth, and he is of the liars.
27.
but if his shirt is torn from the back, then she has lied, and he 
is of the truthful."
28.
so when he [i.e., her husband] saw his shirt torn from the back,
he said, "indeed, it is of your [i.e., women's] plan.  indeed, 
your plan is great [i.e., vehement].
                                               
543the minister in charge of supplies, whose title was al-azeez.
544her husband, al-azeez.


juz 12
218
29.
joseph, ignore this.545  and, [my wife], ask forgiveness for 
your sin.  indeed, you were of the sinful."
30.
and women in the city said, "the wife of al-azeez is seeking 
to seduce her slave boy; he has impassioned her with love.  
indeed, we see her [to be] in clear error."
31.
so when she heard of their scheming, she sent for them and
prepared for them a banquet and gave each one of them a knife 
and said [to joseph], "come out before them."  and when 
they saw him, they greatly admired him and cut their hands546
and said, "perfect is allah!547  this is not a man; this is none 
but a noble angel."
32.
she said, "that is the one about whom you blamed me.  and i 
certainly sought to seduce him, but he firmly refused; and if 
he will not do what i order him, he will surely be imprisoned 
and will be of those debased."
33.
he said, "my lord, prison is more to my liking than that to 
which they invite me.  and if you do not avert from me their plan,
i might incline toward them and [thus] be of the ignorant."
34.
so his lord responded to him and averted from him their plan.  
indeed, he is the hearing, the knowing.
35.
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs548 that 
he [i.e., al-azeez] should surely imprison him for a time.549
36.
and there entered the prison with him two young men.  one 
of them said, "indeed, i have seen myself [in a dream] pressing
wine."  the other said, "indeed, i have seen myself carrying 
upon my head [some] bread, from which the birds were eating.  
inform us of its interpretation; indeed, we see you to be of 
those who do good."
                                               
545i.e., conceal it and act as if it had not taken place.
546so distracted were they at the sight of him.
547in his ability to create such beauty.
548proofs of his innocence.
549until the scandal be forgotten.


juz 12
219
37.
he said, "you will not receive food that is provided to you 
except that i will inform you of its interpretation before it 
comes to you.  that is from what my lord has taught me.  
indeed, i have left the religion of a people who do not believe 
in allah, and they, in the hereafter, are disbelievers.
38.
and i have followed the religion of my fathers, ibrahim, 
isaac and jacob.  and it was not for us to associate anything 
with allah.  that is from the favor of allah upon us and upon 
the people, but most of the people are not grateful.
39.
o [my] two companions of prison, are separate lords better or 
allah, the one, the prevailing?
40.
you worship not besides him except [mere] names you have 
named them,550 you and your fathers, for which allah has sent 
down no authority.  legislation is not but for allah.  he has 
commanded that you worship not except him.  that is the 
correct religion, but most of the people do not know.
41.
o two companions of prison, as for one of you, he will give 
drink to his master of wine; but as for the other, he will be 
crucified, and the birds will eat from his head.  the matter has 
been decreed about which you both inquire."
42.
and he said to the one whom he knew would go free, 
"mention me before your master."  but satan made him forget 
the mention [to] his master, and he [i.e., joseph] remained in 
prison several years.
43.
and [subsequently] the king said, "indeed, i have seen [in a 
dream] seven fat cows being eaten by seven [that were] lean, 
and seven green spikes [of grain] and others [that were] dry.  
o eminent ones, explain to me my vision, if you should interpret
visions."
44.
they said, "[it is but] a mixture of false dreams, and we are 
not learned in the interpretation of dreams."
                                               
550the false objects of worship which you have called "gods."


juz 13
220
45.
but the one who was freed and remembered after a time said, 
"i will inform you of its interpretation, so send me forth."
46.
[he said], "joseph, o man of truth, explain to us about seven 
fat cows eaten by seven [that were] lean, and seven green 
spikes [of grain] and others [that were] dry – that i may return 
to the people [i.e., the king and his court]; perhaps they will 
know [about you]."
47.
[joseph] said, "you will plant for seven years consecutively; 
and what you harvest leave in its spikes, except a little from 
which you will eat.
48.
then will come after that seven difficult [years] which will
consume what you advanced [i.e., saved] for them, except a 
little from which you will store.
49.
then will come after that a year in which the people will be 
given rain and in which they will press [olives and grapes]."
50.
and the king said, "bring him to me."  but when the messenger
came to him, [joseph] said, "return to your master and ask 
him what is the case of the women who cut their hands.  
indeed, my lord is knowing of their plan."
51.
said [the king to the women], "what was your condition when 
you sought to seduce joseph?"  they said, "perfect is allah!551  
we know about him no evil."  the wife of al-azeez said, 
"now the truth has become evident.  it was i who sought to 
seduce him, and indeed, he is of the truthful.
52.
that is so he [i.e., al-azeez] will know that i did not betray 
him in [his] absence and that allah does not guide the plan of 
betrayers.
53.
and i do not acquit myself.  indeed, the soul is a persistent 
enjoiner of evil, except those upon which my lord has mercy.  
indeed, my lord is forgiving and merciful."552
                                               
551in his ability to create such purity of character.
552although ibn katheer attributes the words of verses 52-53 to the wife of 
al-azeez, others have concluded that they were spoken by joseph, 
thereby justifying his request for an inquiry and acknowledging allah's 
mercy to him.


juz 13
221
54.
and the king said, "bring him to me; i will appoint him 
exclusively for myself."  and when he spoke to him, he said, 
"indeed, you are today established [in position] and trusted."
55.
[joseph] said, "appoint me over the storehouses of the land.  
indeed, i will be a knowing guardian."
56.
and thus we established joseph in the land to settle therein
wherever he willed.  we touch with our mercy whom we will,
and we do not allow to be lost the reward of those who do 
good.
57.
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believed 
and were fearing allah.
58.
and the brothers of joseph came [seeking food], and they 
entered upon him; and he recognized them, but he was to them
unknown.553
59.
and when he had furnished them with their supplies, he said, 
"bring me a brother of yours from your father.554  do you not see
that i give full measure and that i am the best of accommodators?
60.
but if you do not bring him to me, no measure will there be 
[hereafter] for you from me, nor will you approach me."
61.
they said, "we will attempt to dissuade his father from [keeping] 
him, and indeed, we will do [it]."
62.
and [joseph] said to his servants, "put their merchandise555
into their saddlebags so they might recognize it when they have 
gone back to their people that perhaps they will [again] return."
63.
so when they returned to their father, they said, "o our father, 
[further] measure has been denied to us, so send with us our 
brother [that] we will be given measure.  and indeed, we will 
be his guardians."
64.
he said, "should i entrust you with him except [under coercion]
as i entrusted you with his brother before?  but allah is the 
best guardian, and he is the most merciful of the merciful."
                                               
553due to the change in his appearance over the years.
554i.e., benjamin, who had been kept at home by his father jacob.
555the goods which they had brought to trade for food supplies.


juz 13
222
65.
and when they opened their baggage, they found their 
merchandise returned to them.  they said, "o our father, what 
[more] could we desire?  this is our merchandise returned to 
us.  and we will obtain supplies [i.e., food] for our family and 
protect our brother and obtain an increase of a camel's load; 
that is an easy measurement."556
66.
[jacob] said, "never will i send him with you until you give 
me a promise [i.e., oath] by allah that you will bring him 
[back] to me, unless you should be surrounded [i.e., overcome 
by enemies]."  and when they had given their promise, he said,
"allah, over what we say, is witness."
67.
and he said, "o my sons, do not enter from one gate but enter 
from different gates; and i cannot avail you against [the 
decree of] allah at all.  the decision is only for allah; upon 
him i have relied, and upon him let those who would rely 
[indeed] rely."
68.
and when they entered from where their father had ordered them,
it did not avail them against allah at all except [it was] a need 
[i.e., concern] within the soul of jacob, which he satisfied.  
and indeed, he was a possessor of knowledge because of what 
we had taught him, but most of the people do not know.
69.
and when they entered upon joseph, he took his brother to 
himself; he said, "indeed, i am your brother, so do not despair 
over what they used to do [to me]."
70.
so when he had furnished them with their supplies, he put the 
[gold measuring] bowl into the bag of his brother.  then an 
announcer called out, "o caravan, indeed you are thieves."
71.
they said while approaching them, "what is it you are missing?"
72.
they said, "we are missing the measure of the king.  and for 
he who produces it is [the reward of] a camel's load, and i am 
responsible for it."
                                               
556for them.  or one obtained by us with ease.


juz 13
223
73.
they said, "by allah, you have certainly known that we did not 
come to cause corruption in the land, and we have not been
thieves."
74.
they [the accusers] said, "then what would be its recompense557
if you should be liars?"
75.
[the brothers] said, "its recompense is that he in whose bag it 
is found – he [himself] will be its recompense.558  thus do we 
recompense the wrongdoers."
76.
so he began [the search] with their bags before the bag of his 
brother; then he extracted it from the bag of his brother.  thus 
did we plan for joseph.  he could not have taken his brother 
within the religion [i.e., law] of the king except that allah willed.  
we raise in degrees whom we will, but over every possessor 
of knowledge is one [more] knowing.559
77.
they said, "if he steals – a brother of his has stolen before."  
but joseph kept it within himself and did not reveal it to them.560  
he said, "you are worse in position, and allah is most knowing
of what you describe."
78.
they said, "o azeez,561 indeed he has a father [who is] an old 
man, so take one of us in place of him.  indeed, we see you as 
a doer of good."
79.
he said, "[i seek] the refuge of allah [to prevent] that we take 
except him with whom we found our possession.  indeed, we 
would then be unjust."
80.
so when they had despaired of him, they secluded themselves 
in private consultation.  the eldest of them said, "do you not 
know that your father has taken upon you an oath by allah 
and [that] before you failed in [your duty to] joseph?  so i 
                                               
557the punishment for theft.
558according to their law, a convicted thief was made a slave of the one 
from whom he had stolen.
559ending with the ultimate knowledge of allah (subhanahu wa taala).
560he did not answer that he himself had been stolen by them from his father.
561addressing joseph, who now held the title of "al-azeez."


juz 13
224
will never leave [this] land until my father permits me or 
allah decides for me,562 and he is the best of judges.
81.
return to your father and say, 'o our father, indeed your son 
has stolen, and we did not testify except to what we knew.  
and we were not witnesses of the unseen.563
82.
and ask the city in which we were and the caravan in which 
we came – and indeed, we are truthful.'"
83.
[jacob] said, "rather, your souls have enticed you to something,
so patience is most fitting.  perhaps allah will bring them to 
me all together.  indeed, it is he who is the knowing, the wise."
84.
and he turned away from them and said, "oh, my sorrow over 
joseph," and his eyes became white564 from grief, for he was 
[of that] a suppressor.565
85.
they said, "by allah, you will not cease remembering joseph 
until you become fatally ill or become of those who perish."
86.
he said, "i only complain of my suffering and my grief to 
allah, and i know from allah that which you do not know.
87.
o my sons, go and find out about joseph and his brother and 
despair not of relief from allah.  indeed, no one despairs of 
relief from allah except the disbelieving people."
88.
so when they entered upon him [i.e., joseph], they said, "o 
azeez, adversity has touched us and our family, and we have 
come with goods poor in quality, but give us full measure and 
be charitable to us.  indeed, allah rewards the charitable."
89.
he said, "do you know what you did with joseph and his 
brother when you were ignorant?"
90.
they said, "are you indeed joseph?"  he said, "i am joseph, 
and this is my brother.  allah has certainly favored us.  indeed,
                                               
562i.e., in my favor by bringing about the release of benjamin.
563i.e., we could not have known when we gave you the oath that he would 
steal and be apprehended.
564i.e., he lost his sight.
565he did not express the extent of his grief or his anger at what he suspected
his sons had done but was patient, depending only upon allah for help.


juz 13
225
he who fears allah and is patient, then indeed, allah does not 
allow to be lost the reward of those who do good."
91. they said, "by allah, certainly has allah preferred you over us,
and indeed, we have been sinners."
92. he said, "no blame will there be upon you today.  allah will 
forgive you; and he is the most merciful of the merciful.
93. take this, my shirt, and cast it over the face of my father; he 
will become seeing.  and bring me your family, all together."
94. and when the caravan departed [from egypt], their father said,566
"indeed, i find the smell of joseph [and would say that he was 
alive] if you did not think me weakened in mind."
95. they said, "by allah, indeed you are in your [same] old error."
96. and when the bearer of good tidings567 arrived, he cast it over 
his face, and he returned [once again] seeing.  he said, "did i not 
tell you that i know from allah that which you do not know?"
97. they said, "o our father, ask for us forgiveness of our sins; 
indeed, we have been sinners."
98. he said, "i will ask forgiveness for you from my lord.  indeed,
it is he who is the forgiving, the merciful."
99. and when they entered upon joseph, he took his parents to 
himself [i.e., embraced them] and said, "enter egypt, allah 
willing, safe [and secure]."
100. and he raised his parents upon the throne, and they bowed to 
him in prostration.568  and he said, "o my father, this is the 
explanation of my vision of before.  my lord has made it 
reality.  and he was certainly good to me when he took me out
of prison and brought you [here] from bedouin life after satan 
had induced [estrangement] between me and my brothers.  
                                               
566to those present with him, either some of his sons or other relatives.
567he who carried joseph's shirt from among the brothers.
568that of greeting and respect, which was lawful until the time of prophet 
muhammad ().  prostration to any person or object other than allah 
was then prohibited conclusively.


juz 13
226
indeed, my lord is subtle in what he wills.  indeed, it is he 
who is the knowing, the wise.
101. my lord, you have given me [something] of sovereignty and 
taught me of the interpretation of dreams.  creator of the heavens 
and earth, you are my protector in this world and the hereafter.  
cause me to die a muslim and join me with the righteous."
102. that is from the news of the unseen which we reveal, [o 
muhammad], to you.  and you were not with them when they 
put together their plan while they conspired.
103. and most of the people, although you strive [for it], are not 
believers.
104. and you do not ask of them for it any payment.  it is not 
except a reminder to the worlds.
105. and how many a sign within the heavens and earth do they 
pass over while they, therefrom, are turning away.
106. and most of them believe not in allah except while they 
associate others with him.
107. then do they feel secure that there will not come to them an 
overwhelming [aspect] of the punishment of allah or that the 
hour will not come upon them suddenly while they do not 
perceive?
108. say, "this is my way; i invite to allah with insight, i and 
those who follow me.  and exalted is allah; and i am not of 
those who associate others with him."
109. and we sent not before you [as messengers] except men to 
whom we revealed from among the people of cities.  so have 
they569 not traveled through the earth and observed how was 
the end of those before them?  and the home of the hereafter 
is best for those who fear allah; then will you not reason?
110. [they continued] until, when the messengers despaired and 
were certain that they had been denied, there came to them 
                                               
569those who deny prophet muhammad ().


juz 13
227
our victory, and whoever we willed was saved.  and our 
punishment cannot be repelled from the people who are 
criminals.
111. there was certainly in their stories a lesson for those of 
understanding.  never was it [i.e., the quran] a narration 
invented, but a confirmation of what was before it and a 
detailed explanation of all things and guidance and mercy for 
a people who believe.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
228
surah ar-rad
570
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, meem, rœ.571  these are the verses of the book; and 
what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth, but 
most of the people do not believe.
2. it is allah who erected the heavens without pillars that you [can]
see; then he established himself above the throne and made 
subject572 the sun and the moon, each running [its course] for a 
specified term.  he arranges [each] matter; he details the signs 
that you may, of the meeting with your lord, be certain.
3. and it is he who spread the earth and placed therein firmly set 
mountains and rivers; and from all of the fruits he made therein 
two mates; he causes the night to cover the day.  indeed in that 
are signs for a people who give thought.
4. and within the land are neighboring plots and gardens of 
grapevines and crops and palm trees, [growing] several from a
root or otherwise,573 watered with one water; but we make some
of them exceed others in [quality of] fruit.  indeed in that are 
signs for a people who reason.
5. and if you are astonished,574 [o muhammad] – then astonishing 
is their saying, "when we are dust, will we indeed be [brought] into 
a new creation?"  those are the ones who have disbelieved in their
lord, and those will have shackles575 upon their necks, and those
are the companions of the fire; they will abide therein eternally.
6. they impatiently urge you to bring about evil before good,576
                                               
570ar-rad:  thunder.
571see footnote to 2:1.
572for the benefit of mankind.
573i.e., only one from a root.
574at those who deny resurrection.
575iron collars to which their hands are chained.
576they said, challenging the prophet () in ridicule, "bring on the punishment,
if you are truthful," rather than asking for mercy and forgiveness from allah.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
229
while there has already occurred before them similar punishments
[to what they demand].  and indeed, your lord is full of 
forgiveness for the people despite their wrongdoing, and indeed,
your lord is severe in penalty.
7.
and those who disbelieved say, "why has a sign not been sent 
down to him from his lord?"  you are only a warner, and for 
every people is a guide.
8.
allah knows what every female carries577 and what the wombs 
lose [prematurely] or exceed.578  and everything with him is 
by due measure.
9.
[he is] knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the grand, 
the exalted.
10.
it is the same [to him] concerning you whether one conceals 
[his] speech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by 
night or conspicuous [among others] by day.
11.
for him [i.e., each one] are successive [angels]579 before and 
behind him who protect him by the decree of allah.580  
indeed, allah will not change the condition of a people until 
they change what is in themselves.  and when allah intends 
for a people ill,581 there is no repelling it.  and there is not for 
them besides him any patron.
12.
it is he who shows you lightening, [causing] fear and aspiration,
and generates the heavy clouds.
13.
and the thunder exalts [allah] with praise of him – and the 
angels [as well] from fear of him – and he sends thunderbolts 
and strikes therewith whom he wills while they dispute about 
allah; and he is severe in assault.
                                               
577with absolute knowledge inclusive of every aspect of the fetus' existence.
578beyond their normal period of pregnancy and/or the number of fetuses therein.
579replacing each other by turn.
580the phrase may also be rendered "...who guard him from [everything except]
the decree of allah."
581i.e., punishment or destruction because of their sins.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
230
14.
to him [alone] is the supplication of truth.  and those they 
call upon besides him do not respond to them with a thing, 
except as one who stretches his hands toward water [from afar,
calling it] to reach his mouth, but it will not reach it [thus].582  
and the supplication of the disbelievers is not but in error 
[i.e., futility].
15.
and to allah prostrates whoever is within the heavens and the 
earth, willingly or by compulsion, and their shadows [as well] 
in the mornings and the afternoons.
16.
say, "who is lord of the heavens and earth?"  say, "allah."  
say, "have you then taken besides him allies not possessing 
[even] for themselves any benefit or any harm?"  say, "is the 
blind equivalent to the seeing?  or is darkness equivalent to 
light?  or have they attributed to allah partners who created 
like his creation so that the creation [of each] seemed similar 
to them?"583  say, "allah is the creator of all things, and he is 
the one, the prevailing."
17.
he sends down from the sky, rain, and valleys flow according 
to their capacity, and the torrent carries a rising foam.  and from
that [ore] which they heat in the fire, desiring adornments and 
utensils, is a foam like it.  thus allah presents [the example 
of] truth and falsehood.  as for the foam, it vanishes, [being] 
cast off; but as for that which benefits the people, it remains 
on the earth.  thus does allah present examples.
18.
for those who have responded to their lord is the best [reward], 
but those who did not respond to him – if they had all that is 
in the earth entirely and the like of it with it, they would 
[attempt to] ransom themselves thereby.  those will have the 
worst account, and their refuge is hell, and wretched is the 
resting place.
19.
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you 
from your lord is the truth like one who is blind?  they will 
only be reminded who are people of understanding –
                                               
582the analogy indicates that false deities will never respond to them at all.
583the obvious conclusion is that the claimed partners, having no ability to create,
cannot be compared to allah in any way.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
231
20.
those who fulfill the covenant of allah and do not break the 
contract,
21.
and those who join that which allah has ordered to be joined584
and fear their lord and are afraid of the evil of [their] account,
22.
and those who are patient, seeking the countenance of their lord,
and establish prayer and spend from what we have provided 
for them secretly and publicly and prevent evil with good –
those will have the good consequence of [this] home585 –
23.
gardens of perpetual residence; they will enter them with 
whoever were righteous among their fathers, their spouses and 
their descendants.  and the angels will enter upon them from 
every gate, [saying],
24.
"peace [i.e., security] be upon you for what you patiently 
endured.  and excellent is the final home."
25.
but those who break the covenant of allah after contracting it 
and sever that which allah has ordered to be joined and 
spread corruption on earth – for them is the curse, and they 
will have the worst home.586
26.
allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts [it].  
and they rejoice in the worldly life, while the worldly life is 
not, compared to the hereafter, except [brief] enjoyment.
27.
and those who disbelieved say, "why has a sign not been sent 
down to him from his lord?"  say, [o muhammad], "indeed, 
allah leaves astray whom he wills and guides to himself 
whoever turns back [to him] –
28.
those who have believed and whose hearts are assured by the 
remembrance of allah.  unquestionably, by the remembrance 
of allah hearts are assured."
                                               
584i.e., they uphold the ties of relationship.
585i.e., the world and its trials, its good consequence being paradise.
586i.e., hell.  another meaning is (in contrast to verse 22), "...and they will 
have the bad consequence of [this] home," also referring to hell.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
232
29.
those who have believed and done righteous deeds – a good 
state is theirs and a good return.
30.
thus have we sent you to a community before which [other] 
communities have passed on so you might recite to them that 
which we revealed to you, while they disbelieve in the most 
merciful.  say, "he is my lord; there is no deity except him.  
upon him i rely, and to him is my return."
31.
and if there was any quran [i.e., recitation] by which the 
mountains would be removed or the earth would be broken 
apart or the dead would be made to speak,587 [it would be this 
quran], but to allah belongs the affair entirely.  then have 
those who believed not accepted that had allah willed, he 
would have guided the people, all of them?  and those who 
disbelieve do not cease to be struck, for what they have done, 
by calamity – or it will descend near their home – until there 
comes the promise of allah.  indeed, allah does not fail in 
[his] promise.
32.
and already were [other] messengers ridiculed before you, 
and i extended the time of those who disbelieved; then i 
seized them, and how [terrible] was my penalty.
33.
then is he who is a maintainer of every soul, [knowing] what 
it has earned, [like any other]?  but to allah they have attributed
partners.  say, "name them.  or do you inform him of that588
which he knows not upon the earth or of what is apparent 
[i.e., alleged] of speech?"589  rather, their [own] plan has been 
made attractive to those who disbelieve, and they have been 
averted from the way.  and whomever allah leaves astray –
there will be for him no guide.
34.
for them will be punishment in the life of [this] world, and the 
punishment of the hereafter is more severe.  and they will not 
have from allah any protector.
                                               
587as suggested by the disbelievers.
588i.e., other "deities."
589i.e., your attributing of divinity to other than allah.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
233
35.
the example [i.e., description] of paradise, which the righteous
have been promised, is [that] beneath it rivers flow.  its fruit is 
lasting, and its shade.  that is the consequence for the righteous,
and the consequence for the disbelievers is the fire.
36.
and [the believers among] those to whom we have given the 
[previous] scripture rejoice at what has been revealed to you, 
[o muhammad], but among the [opposing] factions are those 
who deny part of it [i.e., the quran].  say, "i have only been 
commanded to worship allah and not associate [anything] 
with him.  to him i invite, and to him is my return."
37.
and thus we have revealed it as an arabic legislation.590  and 
if you should follow their inclinations after what has come to 
you of knowledge, you would not have against allah any ally
or any protector.
38.
and we have already sent messengers before you and assigned
to them wives and descendants.  and it was not for a messenger
to come with a sign except by permission of allah.  for every 
term is a decree.
39.
allah eliminates what he wills or confirms, and with him is 
the mother of the book.591
40.
and whether we show you part of what we promise them or 
take you in death, upon you is only the [duty of] notification, 
and upon us is the account.
41.
have they not seen that we set upon the land, reducing it from 
its borders?592  and allah decides; there is no adjuster of his 
decision.  and he is swift in account.
42.
and those before them had plotted, but to allah belongs the plan
entirely.  he knows what every soul earns, and the disbelievers
will know for whom is the final home.
                                               
590i.e., revealed in the arabic language.
591the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), in which is inscribed the 
original of every scripture revealed by allah.
592referring to the spread of islam through allah's prophet () and the 
diminishing of those areas controlled by the polytheists.

surah 13 – ar-rad
juz 13
234
43.
and those who have disbelieved say, "you are not a messenger."  
say, [o muhammad], "sufficient is allah as witness between 
me and you, and [the witness of] whoever has knowledge of 
the scripture."593
                                               
593i.e., those who recognize the truth through their knowledge of previous 
scriptures.


juz 13
235

594
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, rœ.595  [this is] a book which we have revealed to 
you, [o muhammad], that you might bring mankind out of 
darknesses into the light by permission of their lord – to the 
path of the exalted in might, the praiseworthy –
2. allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever 
is on the earth.  and woe [i.e., destruction] to the disbelievers 
from a severe punishment –
3. the ones who prefer the worldly life over the hereafter and 
avert [people] from the way of allah, seeking to make it [seem] 
deviant.  those are in extreme error.
4. and we did not send any messenger except [speaking] in the 
language of his people to state clearly for them, and allah sends 
astray [thereby] whom he wills596 and guides whom he wills.  
and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
5. and we certainly sent moses with our signs, [saying], "bring 
out your people from darknesses into the light and remind them 
of the days597 of allah."  indeed in that are signs for everyone 
patient and grateful.
6. and [recall, o children of israel], when moses said to his people,
"remember the favor of allah upon you when he saved you from
the people of pharaoh, who were afflicting you with the worst
torment and were slaughtering your [newborn] sons and keeping
your females alive.  and in that was a great trial from your lord.
7. and [remember] when your lord proclaimed, 'if you are grateful,
i will surely increase you [in favor]; but if you deny, indeed, 
my punishment is severe.'"
                                               
594ibrahim:  (the prophet) ibrahim.
595see footnote to 2:1.
596i.e., those who refuse his guidance.
597days of blessings bestowed upon the children of israel.  also interpreted 
as days of punishment and destruction of the former nations.


juz 13
236
8.
and moses said, "if you should disbelieve, you and whoever 
is on the earth entirely – indeed, allah is free of need and 
praiseworthy."
9.
has there not reached you the news of those before you – the 
people of noah and aad and thamud and those after them?  
no one knows them [i.e., their number] but allah.  their 
messengers brought them clear proofs, but they returned their 
hands to their mouths598 and said, "indeed, we disbelieve in 
that with which you have been sent, and indeed we are, about 
that to which you invite us, in disquieting doubt."
10.
their messengers said, "can there be doubt about allah, 
creator of the heavens and earth?  he invites you that he may 
forgive you of your sins, and he delays you [i.e., your death] 
for a specified term."  they said, "you are not but men like us 
who wish to avert us from what our fathers were worshipping.  
so bring us a clear authority [i.e., evidence]."
11.
their messengers said to them, "we are only men like you, 
but allah confers favor upon whom he wills of his servants.  
it has never been for us to bring you evidence except by 
permission of allah.  and upon allah let the believers rely.
12.
and why should we not rely upon allah while he has guided 
us to our [good] ways.  and we will surely be patient against 
whatever harm you should cause us.  and upon allah let those 
who would rely [indeed] rely."
13.
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers, "we will 
surely drive you out of our land, or you must return to our 
religion."  so their lord inspired to them, "we will surely 
destroy the wrongdoers.
14.
and we will surely cause you to dwell in the land after them.  
that is for he who fears my position599 and fears my threat."
                                               
598several explanations have been given as to the meaning.  based upon the 
conclusion of the verse, ibn katheer preferred that this was a gesture of 
denial and rejection.
599an alternative meaning is "the standing [for account] before me."


juz 13
237
15.
and they requested decision [i.e., victory from allah], and 
disappointed, [therefore], was every obstinate tyrant.
16.
before him600 is hell, and he will be given a drink of purulent 
water.601
17.
he will gulp it but will hardly [be able to] swallow it.  and 
death will come to him from everywhere, but he is not to die.  
and before him is a massive punishment.
18.
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord is [that] 
their deeds are like ashes which the wind blows forcefully on 
a stormy day; they are unable [to keep] from what they earned 
a [single] thing.  that is what is extreme error.
19.
have you not seen [i.e., considered] that allah created the 
heavens and the earth in truth?  if he wills, he can do away 
with you and produce a new creation.
20.
and that is not difficult for allah.
21.
and they will come out [for judgement] before allah all 
together, and the weak will say to those who were arrogant, 
"indeed, we were your followers, so can you avail us anything 
against the punishment of allah?"  they will say, "if allah 
had guided us, we would have guided you.  it is all the same 
for us whether we show intolerance or are patient:  there is for 
us no place of escape."
22.
and satan will say when the matter has been concluded, 
"indeed, allah had promised you the promise of truth.  and i 
promised you, but i betrayed you.  but i had no authority over 
you except that i invited you, and you responded to me.  so do 
not blame me; but blame yourselves.  i cannot be called to 
your aid, nor can you be called to my aid.  indeed, i deny your 
association of me [with allah] before.602  indeed, for the 
wrongdoers is a painful punishment."
                                               
600literally, "after him [in time]," meaning ahead of him.
601that which oozes from the skins of hell's inhabitants.
602by your obedience to me instead of him during life on earth.


juz 13
238
23.
and those who believed and did righteous deeds will be admitted
to gardens beneath which rivers flow, abiding eternally therein 
by permission of their lord; and their greeting therein will be, 
"peace!"
24.
have you not considered how allah presents an example, 
[making] a good word like a good tree, whose root is firmly 
fixed and its branches [high] in the sky?
25.
it produces its fruit all the time, by permission of its lord.  
and allah presents examples for the people that perhaps they 
will be reminded.
26.
and the example of a bad word is like a bad tree, uprooted 
from the surface of the earth, not having any stability.
27.
allah keeps firm those who believe, with the firm word,603 in 
worldly life and in the hereafter.604  and allah sends astray 
the wrongdoers.  and allah does what he wills.
28.
have you not considered those who exchanged the favor of 
allah for disbelief605 and settled their people [in] the home of 
ruin?
29.
[it is] hell, which they will [enter to] burn, and wretched is 
the settlement.
30.
and they have attributed to allah equals to mislead [people] from
his way.  say, "enjoy yourselves, for indeed, your destination 
is the fire."
31.
[o muhammad], tell my servants who have believed to 
establish prayer and spend from what we have provided them, 
secretly and publicly, before a day comes in which there will 
be no exchange [i.e., ransom], nor any friendships.
32.
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent 
down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as 
                                               
603the testimony that there is no deity except allah and that muhammad () 
is the messenger of allah.
604when questioned in their graves by the angels after death.
605they met allah's blessing with denial instead of gratitude.


juz 13
239
provision for you and subjected for you606 the ships to sail 
through the sea by his command and subjected for you the rivers.
33.
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon, continuous 
[in orbit], and subjected for you the night and the day.
34.
and he gave you from all you asked of him.607  and if you 
should count the favor [i.e., blessings] of allah, you could not 
enumerate them.  indeed, mankind is [generally] most unjust 
and ungrateful.608
35.
and [mention, o muhammad], when ibrahim said, "my lord,
make this city [i.e., makkah] secure and keep me and my sons 
away from worshipping idols.
36.
my lord, indeed they have led astray many among the people.  
so whoever follows me – then he is of me;609 and whoever 
disobeys me – indeed, you are [yet] forgiving and merciful.
37.
our lord, i have settled some of my descendants in an 
uncultivated valley near your sacred house, our lord, that 
they may establish prayer.  so make hearts among the people 
incline toward them and provide for them from the fruits that 
they might be grateful.
38.
our lord, indeed you know what we conceal and what we 
declare, and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in 
the heaven.
39.
praise to allah, who has granted to me in old age ishmael and 
isaac.  indeed, my lord is the hearer of supplication.
40.
my lord, make me an establisher of prayer, and [many] from 
my descendants.  our lord, and accept my supplication.
41.
our lord, forgive me and my parents and the believers the 
day the account is established."
                                               
606i.e., made serviceable to you.
607something of what you asked and all of what you continually require, 
according to his wisdom.
608i.e., disbelieving and denying of allah's favor.
609i.e., of my religion.


juz 13
240
42.
and never think that allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers 
do.  he only delays them [i.e., their account] for a day when 
eyes will stare [in horror].
43.
racing ahead, their heads raised up, their glance does not come
back to them,610 and their hearts are void.
44.
and, [o muhammad], warn the people of a day when the 
punishment will come to them and those who did wrong will 
say, "our lord, delay us for a short term; we will answer 
your call and follow the messengers."  [but it will be said], 
"had you not sworn, before, that for you there would be no 
cessation?611
45.
and you lived among the dwellings of those who wronged 
themselves, and it had become clear to you how we dealt with 
them.  and we presented for you [many] examples."
46.
and they had planned their plan, but with allah is [recorded] 
their plan, even if their plan had been [sufficient] to do away 
with the mountains.612
47.
so never think that allah will fail in his promise to his 
messengers.  indeed, allah is exalted in might and owner of 
retribution.
48.
[it will be] on the day the earth will be replaced by another 
earth, and the heavens [as well], and they [i.e., all creatures] 
will come out before allah, the one, the prevailing,
49.
and you will see the criminals that day bound together in 
shackles,
50.
their garments of liquid pitch and their faces covered by the fire
51.
so that allah will recompense every soul for what it earned.  
indeed, allah is swift in account.
                                               
610this is their state at the time of resurrection from the graves.  their heads 
are upraised in fixed stares of terror, unable even to glance back.
611of the blessings which allah had bestowed upon you during life on earth.
612an alternative meaning is "...and their plan was not [sufficient] to do 
away with the mountains," i.e., it had no effect against allah's will.


juz 13
241
52.
this [quran] is notification for the people that they may be 
warned thereby and that they may know that he is but one 
god and that those of understanding will be reminded.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
242
surah al-hijr
613
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
alif, lam, rœ.614  these are the verses of the book and a clear 
quran [i.e., recitation].
2.
perhaps those who disbelieve will wish615 that they had been 
muslims.
3.
let them eat and enjoy themselves and be diverted by [false] 
hope, for they are going to know.
4.
and we did not destroy any city but that for it was a known 
decree.
5.
no nation will precede its term, nor will they remain thereafter.
6.
and they say, "o you upon whom the message has been sent 
down, indeed you are mad.616
7.
why do you not bring us the angels, if you should be among 
the truthful?"
8.
we do not send down the angels except with truth;617 and they 
[i.e., the disbelievers] would not then be reprieved.
9.
indeed, it is we who sent down the message [i.e., the quran], 
and indeed, we will be its guardian.
10.
and we had certainly sent [messengers] before you, [o 
muhammad], among the sects of the former peoples.
11.
and no messenger would come to them except that they 
ridiculed him.
12.
thus do we insert it [i.e., denial] into the hearts of the criminals.
                                               
613al-hijr:  the valley of stone.  it was inhabited by the tribe of thamud 
(mentioned in verses 80-84), who carved palaces and dwellings out of the rock.
614see footnote to 2:1.
615on the day of judgement or at the time of death.
616literally, "possessed by jinn."
617i.e., with a message or, as the conclusion of the verse suggests, to carry 
out a promised punishment.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
243
13.
they will not believe in it, while there has already occurred 
the precedent of the former peoples.
14.
and [even] if we opened to them a gate from the heaven and 
they continued therein to ascend,
15.
they would say, "our eyes have only been dazzled.  rather, 
we are a people affected by magic."
16.
and we have placed within the heaven great stars and have 
beautified it for the observers.
17.
and we have protected it from every devil expelled [from the 
mercy of allah]
18.
except one who steals a hearing and is pursued by a clear 
burning flame.
19.
and the earth – we have spread it and cast therein firmly set 
mountains and caused to grow therein [something] of every 
well-balanced thing.
20.
and we have made for you therein means of living and [for] 
those for whom you are not providers.618
21.
and there is not a thing but that with us are its depositories, 
and we do not send it down except according to a known [i.e., 
specified] measure.
22.
and we have sent the fertilizing winds619 and sent down water
from the sky and given you drink from it.  and you are not its 
retainers.
23.
and indeed, it is we who give life and cause death, and we 
are the inheritor.620
24.
and we have already known the preceding [generations] among
you, and we have already known the later [ones to come].
                                               
618allah has put at your service other men and animals for which he provides.  
an additional meaning is that allah provides means for your living and 
for all other creatures as well.
619causing precipitation in rainclouds or carrying pollen.  another meaning 
is "pregnant winds," i.e., those carrying rainclouds.
620allah (subhanahu wa taala) remains after all creation has passed away.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
244
25.
and indeed, your lord will gather them; indeed, he is wise 
and knowing.
26.
and we did certainly create man out of clay from an altered 
black mud.
27.
and the jinn we created before from scorching fire.
28.
and [mention, o muhammad], when your lord said to the angels,
"i will create a human being out of clay from an altered black 
mud.
29.
and when i have proportioned him and breathed into him of 
my [created] soul,621 then fall down to him in prostration."
30.
so the angels prostrated – all of them entirely,
31.
except iblees;622 he refused to be with those who prostrated.
32.
[allah] said, "o iblees, what is [the matter] with you that you 
are not with those who prostrate?"
33.
he said, "never would i prostrate to a human whom you created
out of clay from an altered black mud."
34.
[allah] said, "then depart from it,623 for indeed, you are expelled.
35.
and indeed, upon you is the curse until the day of recompense."
36.
he said, "my lord, then reprieve me until the day they are 
resurrected."
37.
[allah] said, "so indeed, you are of those reprieved
38.
until the day of the time well-known."
39.
[iblees] said, "my lord, because you have put me in error, i will
surely make [disobedience] attractive to them [i.e., mankind] 
on earth, and i will mislead them all
40.
except, among them, your chosen servants."
41.
[allah] said, "this is a path [of return] to me [that is] straight.
                                               
621the element of life and soul which allah created for that body, not his 
own spirit or part of himself (as some mistakenly believe).
622who was of the jinn.  see 18:50.
623your position in the heavens.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
245
42.
indeed, my servants – no authority will you have over them, 
except those who follow you of the deviators.
43.
and indeed, hell is the promised place for them all.
44.
it has seven gates; for every gate is of them [i.e., satan's followers]
a portion designated."
45.
indeed, the righteous will be within gardens and springs,
46.
[having been told], "enter it in peace, safe [and secure]."
47.
and we will remove whatever is in their breasts of resentment,624
[so they will be] brothers, on thrones facing each other.
48.
no fatigue will touch them therein, nor from it will they [ever] 
be removed.
49.
[o muhammad], inform my servants that it is i who am the 
forgiving, the merciful,
50.
and that it is my punishment which is the painful punishment.
51.
and inform them about the guests of ibrahim,
52.
when they entered upon him and said, "peace."  [ibrahim] 
said, "indeed, we are fearful [i.e., apprehensive] of you."
53.
[the angels] said, "fear not.  indeed, we give you good tidings
of a learned boy."
54.
he said, "have you given me good tidings although old age 
has come upon me?  then of what [wonder] do you inform?"
55.
they said, "we have given you good tidings in truth, so do not
be of the despairing."
56.
he said, "and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except 
for those astray?"
57.
[ibrahim] said, "then what is your business [here], o 
messengers?"
58.
they said, "indeed, we have been sent to a people of criminals,
59.
except the family of lot; indeed, we will save them all
                                               
624see footnote to 7:43.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
246
60.
except his wife."  we [i.e., allah] decreed that she is of those 
who remain behind.625
61.
and when the messengers came to the family of lot,
62.
he said, "indeed, you are people unknown."
63.
they said, "but we have come to you with that about which 
they were disputing,
64.
and we have come to you with truth, and indeed, we are truthful.
65.
so set out with your family during a portion of the night and 
follow behind them and let not anyone among you look back 
and continue on to where you are commanded."
66.
and we conveyed to him [the decree] of that matter:  that 
those [sinners] would be eliminated by early morning.
67.
and the people of the city came rejoicing.626
68.
[lot] said, "indeed, these are my guests, so do not shame me.
69.
and fear allah and do not disgrace me."
70.
they said, "have we not forbidden you from [protecting] 
people?"
71.
[lot] said, "these are my daughters627 – if you would be doers 
[of lawful marriage]."
72.
by your life, [o muhammad], indeed they were, in their 
intoxication, wandering blindly.
73.
so the shriek628 seized them at sunrise.
74.
and we made the highest part [of the city] its lowest and 
rained upon them stones of hard clay.
75.
indeed in that are signs for those who discern.
76.
and indeed, they [i.e., those cities] are [situated] on an established
road.
                                               
625for having collaborated with the evildoers.
626at the news of lot's visitors.
627i.e., the women of his community who were lawful for marriage.
628see footnote to 11:67.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
247
77.
indeed in that is a sign for the believers.
78.
and the companions of the thicket [i.e., the people of madyan]
were [also] wrongdoers,
79.
so we took retribution from them, and indeed, both [cities] 
are on a clear highway.
80.
and certainly did the companions of al-hijr629 [i.e., the thamud]
deny the messengers.
81.
and we gave them our signs, but from them they were turning
away.
82.
and they used to carve from the mountains, houses, feeling 
secure.
83.
but the shriek seized them at early morning,
84.
so nothing availed them [from] what they used to earn.
85.
and we have not created the heavens and earth and that
between them except in truth.  and indeed, the hour is coming;
so forgive with gracious forgiveness.
86.
indeed, your lord – he is the knowing creator.
87.
and we have certainly given you, [o muhammad], seven of 
the often repeated [verses]630 and the great quran.
88.
do not extend your eyes toward that by which we have given 
enjoyment to [certain] categories of them [i.e., the disbelievers],
and do not grieve over them.  and lower your wing [i.e., show 
kindness] to the believers
89.
and say, "indeed, i am the clear warner" –
90.
just as we had revealed [scriptures] to the separators631
91.
who have made the quran into portions.632
                                               
629the valley of stone.
630referring to surah al-fatihah.
631specifically, the jews and christians, who separated from the teachings 
of their prophets.
632accepting part and rejecting part according to their own inclinations.

surah 15 – al-hijr
juz 14
248
92.
so by your lord, we will surely question them all
93.
about what they used to do.
94.
then declare what you are commanded633 and turn away from 
the polytheists.634
95.
indeed, we are sufficient for you against the mockers
96.
who make [equal] with allah another deity.  but they are 
going to know.
97.
and we already know that your breast is constrained by what 
they say.
98.
so exalt [allah] with praise of your lord and be of those who 
prostrate [to him].
99.
and worship your lord until there comes to you the certainty 
[i.e., death].
                                               
633the implication is "thereby you will distinguish or separate the disbelievers
from the believers."
634any who persist in association of others with allah.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
249
surah an-nahl
635
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. the command of allah is coming,636 so be not impatient for it.  
exalted is he and high above what they associate with him.
2. he sends down the angels, with the inspiration [i.e., revelation] 
of his command, upon whom he wills of his servants, [telling 
them], "warn that there is no deity except me; so fear me."
3. he created the heavens and earth in truth.  high is he above 
what they associate with him.
4. he created man from a sperm-drop; then at once637 he is a clear 
adversary.
5. and the grazing livestock he has created for you; in them is 
warmth638 and [numerous] benefits, and from them you eat.
6. and for you in them is [the enjoyment of] beauty when you 
bring them in [for the evening] and when you send them out [to 
pasture].
7. and they carry your loads to a land you could not have reached 
except with difficulty to yourselves.  indeed, your lord is kind 
and merciful.
8. and [he created] the horses, mules and donkeys for you to ride 
and [as] adornment.  and he creates that which you do not 
know.
9. and upon allah639 is the direction of the [right] way, and among 
them [i.e., the various paths] are those deviating.  and if he willed,
he could have guided you all.
                                               
635an-nahl:  the bee.
636literally, "has come," indicating the certainty and nearness of the last hour.
637as soon as he becomes strong and independent.
638i.e., in clothing, tents, furnishings, etc.
639allah (subhanahu wa taala) has taken it upon himself to guide man to 
the right path.  the meaning has also been interpreted as "to allah..."

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
250
10.
it is he who sends down rain from the sky; from it is drink 
and from it is foliage in which you pasture [animals].
11.
he causes to grow for you thereby the crops, olives, palm trees,
grapevines, and from all the fruits.  indeed in that is a sign for 
a people who give thought.
12.
and he has subjected for you the night and day and the sun 
and moon, and the stars are subjected by his command.  indeed 
in that are signs for a people who reason.
13.
and [he has subjected] whatever he multiplied for you on the 
earth of varying colors.  indeed in that is a sign for a people 
who remember.
14.
and it is he who subjected the sea for you to eat from it 
tender meat and to extract from it ornaments which you wear.  
and you see the ships plowing through it, and [he subjected it]
that you may seek of his bounty; and perhaps you will be grateful.
15.
and he has cast into the earth firmly set mountains, lest it shift
with you, and [made] rivers and roads, that you may be guided,
16.
and landmarks.  and by the stars they are [also] guided.640
17.
then is he who creates like one who does not create?  so will 
you not be reminded?
18.
and if you should count the favors of allah, you could not 
enumerate them.  indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
19.
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare.
20.
and those they invoke other than allah create nothing, and 
they [themselves] are created.
21.
they are, [in fact], dead,641 not alive, and they do not perceive 
when they will be resurrected.
22.
your god is one god.  but those who do not believe in the 
hereafter – their hearts are disapproving, and they are arrogant.
                                               
640through the desert or the sea at night.
641i.e., inanimate or without understanding.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
251
23.
assuredly, allah knows what they conceal and what they declare.  
indeed, he does not like the arrogant.
24.
and when it is said to them, "what has your lord sent down?"
they say, "legends of the former peoples,"
25.
that they may bear their own burdens [i.e., sins] in full on the 
day of resurrection and some of the burdens of those whom they
misguide without [i.e., by lack of] knowledge.  unquestionably,
evil is that which they bear.
26.
those before them had already plotted, but allah came at [i.e., 
uprooted] their building from the foundations, so the roof fell 
upon them from above them,642 and the punishment came to 
them from where they did not perceive.
27.
then on the day of resurrection he will disgrace them and 
say, "where are my 'partners' for whom you used to oppose 
[the believers]?"  those who were given knowledge will say, 
"indeed disgrace, this day, and evil are upon the disbelievers" –
28.
the ones whom the angels take in death [while] wronging 
themselves,643 and [who] then offer submission, [saying], "we 
were not doing any evil."  but, yes!  indeed, allah is knowing 
of what you used to do.
29.
so enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein, and how 
wretched is the residence of the arrogant.
30.
and it will be said to those who feared allah, "what did your 
lord send down?"  they will say, "[that which is] good."  
for those who do good in this world is good; and the home of 
the hereafter is better.  and how excellent is the home of the 
righteous –
31.
gardens of perpetual residence, which they will enter, beneath
which rivers flow.  they will have therein whatever they wish.  
thus does allah reward the righteous –
                                               
642i.e., allah caused their plan to fail and exposed their plot.
643i.e., having made punishment due to them for their numerous sins and crimes.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
252
32.
the ones whom the angels take in death, [being] good and pure;
[the angels] will say, "peace be upon you.  enter paradise for 
what you used to do."
33.
do they [i.e., the disbelievers] await except that the angels should 
come to them or there comes the command of your lord?  
thus did those do before them.  and allah wronged them not, 
but they had been wronging themselves.
34.
so they were struck by the evil consequences of what they did 
and were enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
35.
and those who associate others with allah say, "if allah had 
willed, we would not have worshipped anything other than him,
neither we nor our fathers, nor would we have forbidden anything
through other than him."  thus did those do before them.  so is
there upon the messengers except [the duty of] clear notification?
36.
and we certainly sent into every nation a messenger, [saying], 
"worship allah and avoid taghut."644  and among them were 
those whom allah guided, and among them were those upon 
whom error was [deservedly] decreed.  so proceed [i.e., travel]
through the earth and observe how was the end of the deniers.
37.
[even] if you should strive for their guidance, [o muhammad],
indeed, allah does not guide those he sends astray,645 and 
they will have no helpers.
38.
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths [that] allah will 
not resurrect one who dies.  but yes – [it is] a true promise 
[binding] upon him, but most of the people do not know.
39.
[it is] so he will make clear to them [the truth of] that wherein 
they differ and so those who have disbelieved may know that 
they were liars.
40.
indeed, our word to a thing when we intend it is but that we 
say to it, "be," and it is.
                                               
644false objects of worship.
645as a result of their choice to reject guidance.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
253
41.
and those who emigrated for [the cause of] allah after they 
had been wronged – we will surely settle them in this world 
in a good place; but the reward of the hereafter is greater, if 
only they could know.
42.
[they are] those who endured patiently and upon their lord relied.
43.
and we sent not before you except men to whom we revealed
[our message].  so ask the people of the message [i.e., former 
scriptures] if you do not know.
44.
[we sent them] with clear proofs and written ordinances.  and 
we revealed to you the message [i.e., the quran] that you 
may make clear to the people what was sent down to them and 
that they might give thought.
45.
then, do those who have planned evil deeds feel secure that allah 
will not cause the earth to swallow them or that the punishment
will not come upon them from where they do not perceive?
46.
or that he would not seize them during their [usual] activity, 
and they could not cause failure [i.e., escape from him]?
47.
or that he would not seize them gradually [in a state of dread]?646  
but indeed, your lord is kind and merciful.647
48.
have they not considered what things allah has created?  
their shadows incline to the right and to the left, prostrating 
to allah, while they [i.e., those creations] are humble.
49.
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on the earth of creatures, and the angels [as well], and they 
are not arrogant.
50.
they fear their lord above them, and they do what they are 
commanded.
51.
and allah has said, "do not take for yourselves two648 deities.  
he [i.e., allah] is but one god, so fear only me."
                                               
646i.e., being aware of what is about to strike them after having seen those 
near them succumb.
647postponing deserved punishment and giving opportunities for repentance.
648meaning more than one.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
254
52.
and to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth, 
and to him is [due] worship constantly.  then is it other than
allah that you fear?
53.
and whatever you have of favor – it is from allah.  then when
adversity touches you, to him you cry for help.
54.
then when he removes the adversity from you, at once a party
of you associates others with their lord
55.
so they will deny what we have given them.  then enjoy 
yourselves, for you are going to know.
56.
and they assign to what they do not know649 [i.e., false deities]
a portion of that which we have provided them.  by allah, 
you will surely be questioned about what you used to invent.
57.
and they attribute to allah daughters650 – exalted is he – and 
for them is what they desire [i.e., sons].
58.
and when one of them is informed of [the birth of] a female, 
his face becomes dark, and he suppresses grief.
59.
he hides himself from the people because of the ill of which he 
has been informed.  should he keep it in humiliation or bury it
in the ground?  unquestionably, evil is what they decide.
60.
for those who do not believe in the hereafter is the description
[i.e., an attribute] of evil;651 and for allah is the highest attribute.  
and he is exalted in might, the wise.
61.
and if allah were to impose blame on the people for their 
wrongdoing, he would not have left upon it [i.e., the earth] 
any creature, but he defers them for a specified term.  and 
when their term has come, they will not remain behind an 
hour, nor will they precede [it].
62.
and they attribute to allah that which they dislike [i.e., 
daughters], and their tongues assert the lie that they will have 
                                               
649i.e., that of which they have no knowledge; rather, they have mere assumption
based upon tradition or the claims of misguided men.
650by claiming that the angels are his daughters.
651such as that described in the previous two verses.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
255
the best [from him].  assuredly, they will have the fire, and 
they will be [therein] neglected.652
63.
by allah, we did certainly send [messengers] to nations 
before you, but satan made their deeds attractive to them.  
and he is their [i.e., the disbelievers] ally today [as well], and 
they will have a painful punishment.
64.
and we have not revealed to you the book, [o muhammad], 
except for you to make clear to them that wherein they have 
differed and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
65.
and allah has sent down rain from the sky and given life 
thereby to the earth after its lifelessness.  indeed in that is a 
sign for a people who listen.
66.
and indeed, for you in grazing livestock is a lesson.  we give 
you drink from what is in their bellies – between excretion
and blood – pure milk, palatable to drinkers.
67.
and from the fruits of the palm trees and grapevines you take 
intoxicant and good provision.653  indeed in that is a sign for a 
people who reason.
68.
and your lord inspired to the bee, "take for yourself among 
the mountains, houses [i.e., hives], and among the trees and 
[in] that which they construct.
69.
then eat from all the fruits654 and follow the ways of your 
lord laid down [for you]."  there emerges from their bellies a 
drink, varying in colors, in which there is healing for people.  
indeed in that is a sign for a people who give thought.
70.
and allah created you; then he will take you in death.  and 
among you is he who is reversed to the most decrepit [old] age
so that he will not know, after [having had] knowledge, a thing.  
indeed, allah is knowing and competent.
                                               
652another meaning is "...and they will be made to precede [all others thereto]."
653this verse was revealed before the prohibition of intoxicants.  it alludes 
to the fact that there are both evil and good possibilities in certain things.
654i.e., delicious substances found by the bee.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
256
71.
and allah has favored some of you over others in provision.  
but those who were favored [i.e., given more] would not hand 
over their provision to those whom their right hands possess 
[i.e., slaves] so they would be equal to them therein.655  then 
is it the favor of allah they reject?
72.
and allah has made for you from yourselves mates and has 
made for you from your mates sons and grandchildren and has 
provided for you from the good things.  then in falsehood do 
they believe and in the favor of allah they disbelieve?
73.
and they worship besides allah that which does not possess 
for them [the power of] provision from the heavens and the 
earth at all, and [in fact], they are unable.
74.
so do not assert similarities to allah.656  indeed, allah knows 
and you do not know.
75.
allah presents an example:  a slave [who is] owned and unable
to do a thing and he to whom we have provided from us good 
provision, so he spends from it secretly and publicly. can they
be equal?  praise to allah!  but most of them do not know.
76.
and allah presents an example of two men, one of them dumb
and unable to do a thing, while he is a burden to his guardian.  
wherever he directs him, he brings no good.  is he equal to
one who commands justice, while he is on a straight path?
77.
and to allah belongs the unseen [aspects] of the heavens and 
the earth.  and the command for the hour is not but as a glance
of the eye or even nearer.  indeed, allah is over all things 
competent.
78.
and allah has extracted you from the wombs of your mothers 
not knowing a thing, and he made for you hearing and vision 
and hearts [i.e., intellect] that perhaps you would be grateful.
                                               
655the argument presented in this verse is that if they cannot consider their 
own possessions equal to themselves, then how can they consider allah's 
creations as being equal to him?
656as there is nothing comparable to him.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
257
79.
do they not see the birds controlled in the atmosphere of the 
sky?  none holds them up except allah.  indeed in that are 
signs for a people who believe.
80.
and allah has made for you from your homes a place of rest 
and made for you from the hides of the animals tents which 
you find light on your day of travel and your day of encampment;
and from their wool, fur and hair is furnishing and enjoyment 
[i.e., provision] for a time.
81.
and allah has made for you, from that which he has created, 
shadows [i.e., shade] and has made for you from the 
mountains, shelters and has made for you garments which 
protect you from the heat and garments [i.e., coats of mail] 
which protect you from your [enemy in] battle.  thus does he 
complete his favor upon you that you might submit [to him].
82.
but if they turn away, [o muhammad] – then only upon you 
is [responsibility for] clear notification.
83.
they recognize the favor of allah; then they deny it.  and 
most of them are disbelievers.
84.
and [mention] the day when we will resurrect from every nation 
a witness [i.e., their prophet].  then it will not be permitted to 
the disbelievers [to apologize or make excuses], nor will they 
be asked to appease [allah].
85.
and when those who wronged see the punishment, it will not 
be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved.
86.
and when those who associated others with allah see their 
"partners," they will say, "our lord, these are our partners [to 
you] whom we used to invoke besides you."  but they will 
throw at them the statement, "indeed, you are liars."
87.
and they will impart to allah that day [their] submission, and 
lost from them is what they used to invent.
88.
those who disbelieved and averted [others] from the way of 
allah – we will increase them in punishment over [their] 
punishment for what corruption they were causing.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
258
89.
and [mention] the day when we will resurrect among every
nation a witness over them from themselves [i.e., their prophet].  
and we will bring you, [o muhammad], as a witness over 
these [i.e., your nation].  and we have sent down to you the 
book as clarification for all things and as guidance and mercy 
and good tidings for the muslims.657
90.
indeed, allah orders justice and good conduct and giving to
relatives and forbids immorality and bad conduct and oppression.  
he admonishes you that perhaps you will be reminded.
91.
and fulfill the covenant of allah when you have taken it, [o
believers], and do not break oaths after their confirmation while 
you have made allah, over you, a security [i.e., witness].  
indeed, allah knows what you do.
92.
and do not be like she who untwisted her spun thread after it 
was strong [by] taking your oaths as [means of] deceit between
you because one community is more plentiful [in number or
wealth] than another community.658  allah only tries you thereby.  
and he will surely make clear to you on the day of resurrection
that over which you used to differ.
93.
and if allah had willed, he could have made you [of] one 
religion, but he causes to stray whom he wills and guides 
whom he wills.659  and you will surely be questioned about 
what you used to do.
94.
and do not take your oaths as [means of] deceit between you, 
lest a foot slip after it was [once] firm, and you would taste 
evil [in this world] for what [people] you diverted from the 
way of allah,660 and you would have [in the hereafter] a great 
punishment.
                                               
657those who have submitted themselves to allah.
658i.e., do not swear falsely or break a treaty or contract merely for a worldly 
advantage.
659according to his knowledge of each soul's preference.
660referring to those who would be dissuaded from islam as a result of a 
muslim's deceit and treachery.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
259
95. and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price.  
indeed, what is with allah is best for you, if only you could know.
96. whatever you have will end, but what allah has is lasting.  
and we will surely give those who were patient their reward 
according to the best of what they used to do.
97. whoever does righteousness, whether male or female, while 
he is a believer – we will surely cause him to live a good life, 
and we will surely give them their reward [in the hereafter] 
according to the best of what they used to do.
98. so when you recite the quran, [first] seek refuge in allah
from satan, the expelled [from his mercy].
99. indeed, there is for him no authority over those who have 
believed and rely upon their lord.
100. his authority is only over those who take him as an ally and 
those who through him associate others with allah.
101. and when we substitute a verse in place of a verse – and 
allah is most knowing of what he sends down – they say, 
"you, [o muhammad], are but an inventor [of lies]."  but 
most of them do not know.
102. say, [o muhammad], "the pure spirit [i.e., gabriel] has
brought it down from your lord in truth to make firm those who 
believe and as guidance and good tidings to the muslims."
103. and we certainly know that they say, "it is only a human being
who teaches him [i.e., the prophet ()]."  the tongue of the 
one they refer to is foreign,661 and this [recitation, i.e., quran] 
is [in] a clear arabic language.
104. indeed, those who do not believe in the verses of allah –
allah will not guide them, and for them is a painful punishment.
105. they only invent falsehood who do not believe in the verses 
of allah, and it is those who are the liars.
                                               
661having seen the prophet () speaking with a foreign man on occasion, 
the quraysh accused him of repeating the man's words.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
260
106. whoever disbelieves in [i.e., denies] allah after his belief...662
except for one who is forced [to renounce his religion] while 
his heart is secure in faith.  but those who [willingly] open 
their breasts to disbelief, upon them is wrath from allah, and 
for them is a great punishment;
107. that is because they preferred the worldly life over the
hereafter and that allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
108. those are the ones over whose hearts and hearing and vision 
allah has sealed, and it is those who are the heedless.
109. assuredly, it is they, in the hereafter, who will be the losers.
110. then, indeed your lord, to those who emigrated after they 
had been compelled [to say words of disbelief] and thereafter 
fought [for the cause of allah] and were patient – indeed, your 
lord, after that, is forgiving and merciful
111. on the day when every soul will come disputing [i.e., pleading]
for itself, and every soul will be fully compensated for what it 
did, and they will not be wronged [i.e., treated unjustly].
112. and allah presents an example:  a city [i.e., makkah] which 
was safe and secure, its provision coming to it in abundance 
from every location, but it denied the favors of allah.  so allah
made it taste the envelopment of hunger and fear for what 
they had been doing.
113. and there had certainly come to them a messenger from among
themselves, but they denied him; so punishment overtook them
while they were wrongdoers.
114. then eat of what allah has provided for you [which is] lawful 
and good.  and be grateful for the favor of allah, if it is [indeed]
him that you worship.
115. he has only forbidden to you dead animals,663 blood, the flesh 
of swine, and that which has been dedicated to other than allah.  
                                               
662based upon the conclusion of this verse, the omitted phrase concerning 
the apostate is understood to be "...has earned the wrath of allah..."
663those not slaughtered or hunted expressly for food.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
261
but whoever is forced [by necessity], neither desiring [it] nor 
transgressing [its limit] – then indeed, allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
116. and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth, 
"this is lawful and this is unlawful," to invent falsehood about 
allah.  indeed, those who invent falsehood about allah will 
not succeed.
117. [it is but] a brief enjoyment, and they will have a painful 
punishment.
118. and to those who are jews we have prohibited that which we 
related to you before.664  and we did not wrong them [thereby],
but they were wronging themselves.
119. then, indeed your lord, to those who have done wrong out of
ignorance and then repent after that and correct themselves –
indeed, your lord, thereafter, is forgiving and merciful.
120. indeed, ibrahim was a [comprehensive] leader,665 devoutly 
obedient to allah, inclining toward truth, and he was not of 
those who associate others with allah.
121. [he was] grateful for his favors.  he [i.e., allah] chose him 
and guided him to a straight path.
122. and we gave him good in this world, and indeed, in the 
hereafter he will be among the righteous.
123. then we revealed to you, [o muhammad], to follow the 
religion of ibrahim, inclining toward truth; and he was not of 
those who associate with allah.
124. the sabbath was only appointed for those who differed over it.  
and indeed, your lord will judge between them on the day of 
resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ.
125. invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good instruction,
                                               
664see 6:146.
665i.e., embodying all the excellent qualities which make one an example to 
be followed.

surah 16 – an-nahl
juz 14
262
and argue with them in a way that is best.  indeed, your lord 
is most knowing of who has strayed from his way, and he is 
most knowing of who is [rightly] guided.
126. and if you punish [an enemy, o believers], punish with an 
equivalent of that with which you were harmed.666  but if you 
are patient – it is better for those who are patient.
127. and be patient, [o muhammad], and your patience is not but 
through allah.  and do not grieve over them and do not be in 
distress over what they conspire.
128. indeed, allah is with those who fear him and those who are 
doers of good.
                                               
666not exceeding it.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
263
surah al-isra
667
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. exalted668 is he who took his servant [i.e., prophet muhammad
()] by night from al-masjid al-haram to al-masjid al-aq§œ,669
whose surroundings we have blessed, to show him of our signs.  
indeed, he is the hearing, the seeing.
2. and we gave moses the scripture and made it a guidance for 
the children of israel that you not take other than me as 
disposer of affairs,670
3. o descendants of those we carried [in the ship] with noah.  
indeed, he was a grateful servant.
4. and we conveyed671 to the children of israel in the scripture 
that, "you will surely cause corruption on the earth twice, and 
you will surely reach [a degree of] great haughtiness."
5. so when the [time of] promise came for the first of them,672 we 
sent against you servants of ours – those of great military might,
and they probed [even] into the homes,673 and it was a promise 
fulfilled.
6. then we gave back to you a return victory over them.  and we 
reinforced you with wealth and sons and made you more numerous
in manpower
7. [and said], "if you do good, you do good for yourselves; and if 
you do evil, [you do it] to them [i.e., yourselves]."  then when 
                                               
667al-isra:  the night journey.  the surah is also known as ban¥ israeel
(the children of israel).
668above any imperfection or failure to do as he wills.
669in jerusalem.
670i.e., trust in allah, knowing that he (subhanahu wa taala) is responsible 
for every occurrence.
671foretold out of divine knowledge of what they would do.
672i.e., the promised punishment for the first of their two transgressions.
673violating their sanctity, to kill and plunder.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
264
the final [i.e., second] promise came, [we sent your enemies] 
to sadden your faces and to enter the masjid [i.e., the temple in 
jerusalem], as they entered it the first time, and to destroy 
what they had taken over with [total] destruction.
8.
[then allah said], "it is expected, [if you repent], that your 
lord will have mercy upon you.  but if you return [to sin], we 
will return [to punishment].  and we have made hell, for the 
disbelievers, a prison-bed."
9.
indeed, this quran guides to that which is most suitable and 
gives good tidings to the believers who do righteous deeds 
that they will have a great reward
10.
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter – we have 
prepared for them a painful punishment.
11.
and man supplicates for evil [when angry] as he supplicates 
for good, and man is ever hasty.674
12.
and we have made the night and day two signs, and we erased
the sign of the night and made the sign of the day visible675
that you may seek bounty from your lord and may know the 
number of years and the account [of time].  and everything 
we have set out in detail.
13.
and [for] every person we have imposed his fate upon his 
neck,676 and we will produce for him on the day of resurrection
a record which he will encounter spread open.
14.
[it will be said], "read your record.  sufficient is yourself against 
you this day as accountant."
15.
whoever is guided is only guided for [the benefit of] his soul.  
and whoever errs only errs against it.  and no bearer of burdens
will bear the burden of another.  and never would we punish 
until we sent a messenger.
                                               
674i.e., impatient, emotional, and acting without forethought.
675or "giving sight."
676i.e., after having instructed him, we have made him responsible for his 
own destiny.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
265
16.
and when we intend to destroy a city, we command its 
affluent677 but they defiantly disobey therein; so the word [i.e., 
deserved decree] comes into effect upon it, and we destroy it 
with [complete] destruction.
17.
and how many have we destroyed from the generations after 
noah.  and sufficient is your lord, concerning the sins of his 
servants, as acquainted and seeing.
18.
whoever should desire the immediate678 – we hasten for him
from it what we will to whom we intend.  then we have made 
for him hell, which he will [enter to] burn, censured and banished.
19.
but whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to 
it while he is a believer – it is those whose effort is ever 
appreciated [by allah].
20.
to each [category] we extend – to these and to those – from 
the gift of your lord.  and never has the gift of your lord 
been restricted.
21.
look how we have favored [in provision] some of them over 
others.  but the hereafter is greater in degrees [of difference] 
and greater in distinction.
22.
do not make [as equal] with allah another deity and [thereby] 
become censured and forsaken.
23.
and your lord has decreed that you not worship except him, 
and to parents, good treatment.  whether one or both of them 
reach old age [while] with you, say not to them [so much as], 
"uff,"679 and do not repel them but speak to them a noble word.
24.
and lower to them the wing of humility out of mercy and say, 
"my lord, have mercy upon them as they brought me up 
[when i was] small."
25.
your lord is most knowing of what is within yourselves.  if 
you should be righteous [in intention] – then indeed he is ever,
                                               
677to obey allah.
678i.e., worldly gratifications.
679an expression of disapproval or irritation.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
266
to the often returning [to him], forgiving.680
26.
and give the relative his right, and [also] the poor and the traveler,
and do not spend wastefully.681
27.
indeed, the wasteful are brothers of the devils, and ever has 
satan been to his lord ungrateful.
28.
and if you [must] turn away from them [i.e., the needy] awaiting
mercy from your lord which you expect,682 then speak to them 
a gentle word.
29.
and do not make your hand [as] chained to your neck683 or extend 
it completely684 and [thereby] become blamed and insolvent.
30.
indeed, your lord extends provision for whom he wills and 
restricts [it].  indeed he is ever, concerning his servants, 
acquainted and seeing.
31.
and do not kill your children for fear of poverty.  we provide 
for them and for you.  indeed, their killing is ever a great sin.
32.
and do not approach unlawful sexual intercourse.685  indeed, 
it is ever an immorality and is evil as a way.
33.
and do not kill the soul [i.e., person] which allah has forbidden, 
except by right.686  and whoever is killed unjustly – we have 
given his heir authority,687 but let him not exceed limits in [the 
matter of] taking life.  indeed, he has been supported [by the law].
34.
and do not approach the property of an orphan, except in the
way that is best,688 until he reaches maturity.  and fulfill [every]
                                               
680for those who intend righteousness, hastening to repent from sins and 
errors committed through human weakness, allah (subhanahu wa taala) 
promises forgiveness.
681i.e., on that which is unlawful or in disobedience to allah.
682i.e., if you have not the means to give them at present.
683i.e., refusing to spend.
684i.e., being extravagant.
685i.e., avoid all situations that might possibly lead to it.
686i.e., through legal justice or during jihad.
687grounds for legal action.
688i.e., to improve or increase it.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
267
commitment.  indeed, the commitment is ever [that about which
one will be] questioned.
35.
and give full measure when you measure, and weigh with an 
even [i.e., honest] balance.  that is the best [way] and best in 
result.
36.
and do not pursue689 that of which you have no knowledge.  
indeed, the hearing, the sight and the heart – about all those 
[one] will be questioned.
37.
and do not walk upon the earth exultantly.  indeed, you will 
never tear the earth [apart], and you will never reach the 
mountains in height.690
38.
all that [i.e., the aforementioned] – its evil is ever, in the sight 
of your lord, detested.
39.
that is from what your lord has revealed to you, [o muhammad],
of wisdom.  and, [o mankind], do not make [as equal] with 
allah another deity, lest you be thrown into hell, blamed and 
banished.
40.
then, has your lord chosen you for [having] sons and taken 
[i.e., adopted] from among the angels daughters?  indeed, you 
say a grave saying.
41.
and we have certainly diversified [the contents] in this quran
that they [i.e., mankind] may be reminded, but it does not 
increase them [i.e., the disbelievers] except in aversion.
42.
say, [o muhammad], "if there had been with him [other] 
gods, as they say, then they [each] would have sought to the
owner of the throne a way."691
43.
exalted is he and high above what they say by great sublimity.
44.
the seven heavens and the earth and whatever is in them exalt 
                                               
689i.e., do not assume and do not say.
690man, for all his arrogance, is yet a weak and small creature.
691to please him, recognizing his superiority.  another interpretation is 
"...they would seek a way" to depose him (subhanahu wa taala) and 
take over his throne.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
268
him.  and there is not a thing except that it exalts [allah] by 
his praise, but you do not understand their [way of] exalting.  
indeed, he is ever forbearing and forgiving.
45.
and when you recite the quran, we put between you and those 
who do not believe in the hereafter a concealed partition.692
46.
and we have placed over their hearts coverings, lest they
understand it, and in their ears deafness.  and when you mention 
your lord alone in the quran, they turn back in aversion.
47.
we are most knowing of how they listen to it when they listen 
to you and [of] when they are in private conversation, when the
wrongdoers say, "you follow not but a man affected by magic."
48.
look how they strike for you comparisons;693 but they have 
strayed, so they cannot [find] a way.
49.
and they say, "when we are bones and crumbled particles, 
will we [truly] be resurrected as a new creation?"
50.
say, "be you stones or iron694
51.
or [any] creation of that which is great695 within your breasts."  
and they will say, "who will restore us?"  say, "he who 
brought you forth the first time."  then they will nod their 
heads toward you696 and say, "when is that?"  say, "perhaps it 
will be soon –
52.
on the day he will call you and you will respond with praise 
of him and think that you had not remained [in the world] 
except for a little."
53.
and tell my servants to say that which is best.  indeed, satan 
induces [dissension] among them.  indeed satan is ever, to 
mankind, a clear enemy.
                                               
692preventing guidance from reaching them.
693describing the prophet () as a poet, a madman or one under the influence
of sorcery.
694i.e., even if you should be stones or iron.
695such as the heavens and earth.
696in disbelief and ridicule.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
269
54.
your lord is most knowing of you.  if he wills, he will have 
mercy upon you; or if he wills, he will punish you.  and we 
have not sent you, [o muhammad], over them as a manager.
55.
and your lord is most knowing of whoever is in the heavens 
and the earth.  and we have made some of the prophets 
exceed others [in various ways], and to david we gave the 
book [of psalms].
56.
say, "invoke those you have claimed [as gods] besides him, 
for they do not possess the [ability for] removal of adversity 
from you or [for its] transfer [to someone else]."
57.
those whom they invoke697 seek means of access to their lord,
[striving as to] which of them would be nearest, and they hope 
for his mercy and fear his punishment.  indeed, the punishment
of your lord is ever feared.
58.
and there is no city but that we will destroy it698 before the 
day of resurrection or punish it with a severe punishment.  
that has ever been in the register699 inscribed.
59.
and nothing has prevented us from sending signs [i.e., miracles]
except that the former peoples denied them.  and we gave 
thamud the she-camel as a visible sign, but they wronged her.  
and we send not the signs except as a warning.
60.
and [remember, o muhammad], when we told you, "indeed, 
your lord has encompassed the people."700  and we did not 
make the sight which we showed you701 except as a trial for 
the people, as was the accursed tree [mentioned] in the quran.  
and we threaten [i.e., warn] them, but it increases them not 
except in great transgression.
                                               
697among the righteous of allah's creation, such as angels, prophets, deceased
scholars, etc.
698because of the sins of its inhabitants.
699the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), which is with allah.
700in his knowledge and power, meaning that allah would protect him () 
from their harm.
701during the miraj (ascension) into the heavens.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
270
61.
and [mention] when we said to the angels, "prostrate to adam,"
and they prostrated, except for iblees.702  he said, "should i 
prostrate to one you created from clay?"
62.
[iblees] said, "do you see this one whom you have honored 
above me?  if you delay me [i.e., my death] until the day of 
resurrection, i will surely destroy703 his descendants, except 
for a few."
63.
[allah] said, "go, for whoever of them follows you, indeed hell 
will be the recompense of [all of] you – an ample recompense.
64.
and incite [to senselessness] whoever you can among them with 
your voice and assault them with your horses and foot soldiers 
and become a partner in their wealth and their children and
promise them."  but satan does not promise them except delusion.
65.
indeed, over my [believing] servants there is for you no authority.  
and sufficient is your lord as disposer of affairs.
66.
it is your lord who drives the ship for you through the sea that
you may seek of his bounty.  indeed, he is ever, to you, merciful.
67.
and when adversity touches you at sea, lost are [all] those you 
invoke except for him.  but when he delivers you to the land, 
you turn away [from him].  and ever is man ungrateful.
68.
then do you feel secure that [instead] he will not cause a part of 
the land to swallow you or send against you a storm of stones?  
then you would not find for yourselves an advocate.
69.
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into it 
[i.e., the sea] another time and send upon you a hurricane of 
wind and drown you for what you denied?704  then you would 
not find for yourselves against us an avenger.705
70.
and we have certainly honored the children of adam and 
carried them on the land and sea and provided for them of the 
                                               
702see footnote to 2:34.
703by tempting them and leading them astray.
704or "for your disbelief."
705or "someone to demand restitution."

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
271
good things and preferred them over much of what we have 
created, with [definite] preference.
71.
[mention, o muhammad], the day we will call forth every 
people with their record [of deeds].706  then whoever is given 
his record in his right hand – those will read their records, and 
injustice will not be done to them, [even] as much as a thread 
[inside the date seed].
72.
and whoever is blind707 in this [life] will be blind in the hereafter
and more astray in way.
73.
and indeed, they were about to tempt you away from that which 
we revealed to you in order to [make] you invent about us 
something else; and then they would have taken you as a friend.
74.
and if we had not strengthened you, you would have almost 
inclined to them a little.
75.
then [if you had], we would have made you taste double 
[punishment in] life and double [after] death.  then you would 
not find for yourself against us a helper.
76.
and indeed, they were about to provoke [i.e., drive] you from 
the land [i.e., makkah] to evict you therefrom.  and then 
[when they do], they will not remain [there] after you, except 
for a little.708
77.
[that is our] established way for those we had sent before 
you of our messengers; and you will not find in our way any 
alteration.
78.
establish prayer at the decline of the sun [from its meridian] 
until the darkness of the night709 and [also] the quran [i.e., 
recitation] of dawn.710  indeed, the recitation of dawn is ever 
witnessed.
                                               
706other meanings are "with their leader" or "with that which they had followed."
707i.e., refusing to see the truth.
708only ten years after the prophet's emigration, makkah was completely 
cleared of his enemies.
709i.e., the period which includes the thuhr, asr, maghrib, and isha prayers.
710i.e., the fajr prayer, in which the recitation of the quran is prolonged.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
272
79.
and from [part of] the night, pray711 with it [i.e., recitation of 
the quran] as additional [worship] for you; it is expected that712
your lord will resurrect you to a praised station.713
80.
and say, "my lord, cause me to enter a sound entrance714 and 
to exit a sound exit715 and grant me from yourself a supporting
authority."
81.
and say, "truth has come, and falsehood has departed.  indeed
is falsehood, [by nature], ever bound to depart."
82.
and we send down of the quran that which is healing and mercy
for the believers, but it does not increase the wrongdoers 
except in loss.
83.
and when we bestow favor upon man [i.e., the disbeliever], 
he turns away and distances himself; and when evil touches 
him, he is ever despairing.
84.
say, "each works according to his manner, but your lord is 
most knowing of who is best guided in way."
85.
and they ask you, [o muhammad], about the soul.  say, "the 
soul is of the affair [i.e., concern] of my lord.  and you [i.e., 
mankind] have not been given of knowledge except a little."
86.
and if we willed, we could surely do away with that which 
we revealed to you.  then you would not find for yourself 
concerning it an advocate against us.
87.
except [we have left it with you] as a mercy from your lord.  
indeed, his favor upon you has ever been great.
88.
say, "if mankind and the jinn gathered in order to produce the 
like of this quran, they could not produce the like of it, even 
if they were to each other assistants."
                                               
711literally, "arise from sleep for prayer."
712this is a promise from allah (subhanahu wa taala) to prophet muhammad ().
713the position of intercession by permission of allah and the highest 
degree in paradise.
714into madinah at the time of emigration, or into the grave.
715from makkah, or from the grave at the time of resurrection.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
273
89.
and we have certainly diversified for the people in this quran
from every [kind of] example, but most of the people refused 
except disbelief.
90.
and they say, "we will not believe you until you break open 
for us from the ground a spring
91.
or [until] you have a garden of palm trees and grapes and 
make rivers gush forth within them in force [and abundance]
92.
or you make the heaven fall upon us in fragments as you have 
claimed or you bring allah and the angels before [us]
93.
or you have a house of ornament [i.e., gold] or you ascend 
into the sky.  and [even then], we will not believe in your 
ascension until you bring down to us a book we may read."  
say, "exalted is my lord!  was i ever but a human messenger?"
94.
and what prevented the people from believing when guidance 
came to them except that they said, "has allah sent a human 
messenger?"
95.
say, "if there were upon the earth angels walking securely,716
we would have sent down to them from the heaven an angel 
[as a] messenger."
96.
say, "sufficient is allah as witness between me and you.  indeed 
he is ever, concerning his servants, acquainted and seeing."
97.
and whoever allah guides – he is the [rightly] guided; and 
whoever he sends astray717 – you will never find for them 
protectors besides him, and we will gather them on the day 
of resurrection [fallen] on their faces – blind, dumb and deaf.  
their refuge is hell; every time it subsides we increase them 
in blazing fire.
98.
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our verses 
and said, "when we are bones and crumbled particles, will we 
[truly] be resurrected [in] a new creation?"
                                               
716i.e., who were settled and established there, as is man.
717as a result of his own preference.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
274
99. do they not see that allah, who created the heavens and earth, 
is [the one] able to create the likes of them?  and he has 
appointed for them a term, about which there is no doubt.  but 
the wrongdoers refuse except disbelief.
100. say [to them], "if you possessed the depositories of the mercy
of my lord, then you would withhold out of fear of spending."  
and ever has man been stingy.
101. and we had certainly given moses nine evident signs, so ask 
the children of israel [about] when he came to them and 
pharaoh said to him, "indeed i think, o moses, that you are 
affected by magic."
102. [moses] said, "you have already known that none has sent 
down these [signs] except the lord of the heavens and the 
earth as evidence, and indeed i think,718 o pharaoh, that you 
are destroyed."
103. so he intended to drive them from the land, but we drowned 
him and those with him all together.
104. and we said after him [i.e., pharaoh] to the children of israel, 
"dwell in the land, and when there comes the promise [i.e., 
appointment] of the hereafter, we will bring you forth in 
[one] gathering."
105. and with the truth we have sent it [i.e., the quran] down, and 
with the truth is has descended.  and we have not sent you, 
[o muhammad], except as a bringer of good tidings and a warner.
106. and [it is] a quran which we have separated [by intervals] 
that you might recite it to the people over a prolonged period.  
and we have sent it down progressively.
107. say, "believe in it or do not believe."  indeed, those who were 
given knowledge before it719 – when it is recited to them, they 
fall upon their faces in prostration,
                                               
718i.e., i am certain.
719i.e., the righteous among the people of the scriptures who recognize the 
truth contained in the quran.

surah 17 – al-isra
juz 15
275
108. and they say, "exalted is our lord!  indeed, the promise of 
our lord has been fulfilled."
109. and they fall upon their faces weeping, and it [i.e., the quran]
increases them in humble submission.
110. say, "call upon allah or call upon the most merciful 
[ar-rahman].  whichever [name] you call – to him belong the 
best names."  and do not recite [too] loudly in your prayer or 
[too] quietly but seek between that an [intermediate] way.
111. and say, "praise to allah, who has not taken a son and has had 
no partner in [his] dominion and has no [need of a] protector
out of weakness; and glorify him with [great] glorification."

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
276
surah al-kahf
720
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
[all] praise is [due] to allah, who has sent down upon his 
servant [muhammad ()] the book and has not made therein 
any deviance.721
2.
[he has made it] straight, to warn of severe punishment from
him and to give good tidings to the believers who do righteous 
deeds that they will have a good reward [i.e., paradise]
3.
in which they will remain forever
4.
and to warn those who say, "allah has taken a son."
5.
they have no knowledge of it,722 nor had their fathers.  grave 
is the word that comes out of their mouths; they speak not 
except a lie.
6.
then perhaps you would kill yourself through grief over them, 
[o muhammad], if they do not believe in this message, [and] 
out of sorrow.
7.
indeed, we have made that which is on the earth adornment for 
it that we may test them [as to] which of them is best in deed.
8.
and indeed, we will make that which is upon it [into] a barren 
ground.
9.
or have you thought that the companions of the cave and the 
inscription were, among our signs, a wonder?723
10.
[mention] when the youths retreated to the cave and said, 
"our lord, grant us from yourself mercy and prepare for us 
from our affair right guidance."
11.
so we cast [a cover of sleep] over their ears within the cave 
for a number of years.
                                               
720al-kahf:  the cave.
721from the truth or the straight path.
722i.e., they could not have had knowledge of something which is not true.
723rather, it is only one of the many wonders of allah.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
277
12.
then we awakened them that we might show which of the 
two factions was most precise in calculating what [extent] 
they had remained in time.
13.
it is we who relate to you, [o muhammad], their story in truth.  
indeed, they were youths who believed in their lord, and we 
increased them in guidance.
14.
and we bound [i.e., made firm] their hearts when they stood 
up and said, "our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth.  
never will we invoke besides him any deity.  we would have 
certainly spoken, then, an excessive transgression.
15.
these, our people, have taken besides him deities.  why do 
they not bring for [worship of] them a clear authority?  and 
who is more unjust than one who invents about allah a lie?"
16.
[the youths said to one another], "and when you have withdrawn
from them and that which they worship other than allah, 
retreat to the cave.  your lord will spread out for you of his 
mercy and will prepare for you from your affair facility."
17.
and [had you been present], you would see the sun when it rose,
inclining away from their cave on the right, and when it set, 
passing away from them on the left, while they were [laying] 
within an open space thereof.  that was from the signs of allah.  
he whom allah guides is the [rightly] guided, but he whom he
leaves astray – never will you find for him a protecting guide.
18.
and you would think them awake, while they were asleep.  
and we turned them to the right and to the left, while their 
dog stretched his forelegs at the entrance.  if you had looked 
at them, you would have turned from them in flight and been 
filled by them with terror.
19.
and similarly,724 we awakened them that they might question 
one another.  said a speaker from among them, "how long 
have you remained [here]?"  they said, "we have remained a 
day or part of a day."  they said, "your lord is most knowing 
                                               
724by the will of allah.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
278
of how long you remained.  so send one of you with this 
silver coin of yours to the city and let him look to which is the 
best of food and bring you provision from it and let him be 
cautious.  and let no one be aware of you.
20.
indeed, if they come to know of you, they will stone you or 
return you to their religion.  and never would you succeed, 
then – ever."
21.
and similarly, we caused them to be found that they [who 
found them] would know that the promise of allah is truth 
and that of the hour there is no doubt.  [that was] when they725
disputed among themselves about their affair and [then] said, 
"construct over them a structure.  their lord is most knowing 
about them."  said those who prevailed in the matter, "we 
will surely take [for ourselves] over them a masjid."726
22.
they [i.e., people] will say there were three, the fourth of them
being their dog; and they will say there were five, the sixth of 
them being their dog – guessing at the unseen; and they will 
say there were seven, and the eighth of them was their dog.  
say, [o muhammad], "my lord is most knowing of their number.  
none knows them except a few.  so do not argue about them 
except with an obvious argument727 and do not inquire about 
them among [the speculators] from anyone."
23.
and never say of anything, "indeed, i will do that tomorrow,"
24.
except [when adding], "if allah wills."  and remember your 
lord when you forget [it] and say, "perhaps my lord will 
guide me to what is nearer than this to right conduct."
25.
and they remained in their cave for three hundred years and 
exceeded by nine.728
26.
say, "allah is most knowing of how long they remained.  he has
                                               
725the people of the city.
726i.e., we will make this site a place of worship.
727i.e., one from the quran, which is the only sure argument.
728according to the lunar calendar.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
279
[knowledge of] the unseen [aspects] of the heavens and the earth.  
how seeing is he and how hearing!  they have not besides him
any protector, and he shares not his legislation with anyone."
27.
and recite, [o muhammad], what has been revealed to you of 
the book of your lord.  there is no changer of his words, and 
never will you find in other than him a refuge.
28.
and keep yourself patient [by being] with those who call upon 
their lord in the morning and the evening, seeking his 
countenance.  and let not your eyes pass beyond them, desiring
adornments of the worldly life, and do not obey one whose 
heart we have made heedless of our remembrance and who 
follows his desire and whose affair is ever [in] neglect.729
29.
and say, "the truth is from your lord, so whoever wills – let 
him believe; and whoever wills – let him disbelieve."  indeed, 
we have prepared for the wrongdoers a fire whose walls will 
surround them.  and if they call for relief, they will be relieved
with water like murky oil, which scalds [their] faces.  wretched
is the drink, and evil is the resting place.
30.
indeed, those who have believed and done righteous deeds –
indeed, we will not allow to be lost the reward of any who did 
well in deeds.
31.
those will have gardens of perpetual residence; beneath them 
rivers will flow.  they will be adorned therein with bracelets 
of gold and will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade, 
reclining therein on adorned couches.  excellent is the reward, 
and good is the resting place.
32.
and present to them an example of two men:  we granted to 
one of them two gardens of grapevines, and we bordered them
with palm trees and placed between them [fields of] crops.
33.
each of the two gardens produced its fruit and did not fall short 
thereof in anything.  and we caused to gush forth within them
a river.
                                               
729or "in excess," exceeding the limits of allah.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
280
34.
and he had fruit, so he said to his companion while he was 
conversing with him, "i am greater than you in wealth and 
mightier in [numbers of] men."
35.
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself.730  
he said, "i do not think that this will perish – ever.
36.
and i do not think the hour will occur.  and even if i should 
be brought back to my lord, i will surely find better than this 
as a return."
37.
his companion said to him while he was conversing with him, 
"have you disbelieved in he who created you from dust and 
then from a sperm-drop and then proportioned you [as] a man?
38.
but as for me, he is allah, my lord, and i do not associate 
with my lord anyone.
39.
and why did you, when you entered your garden, not say, 'what
allah willed [has occurred]; there is no power except in allah'?  
although you see me less than you in wealth and children,
40.
it may be that my lord will give me [something] better than 
your garden and will send upon it a calamity from the sky, and 
it will become a smooth, dusty ground,
41.
or its water will become sunken [into the earth], so you would 
never be able to seek it."
42.
and his fruits were encompassed [by ruin], so he began to 
turn his hands about [in dismay] over what he had spent on it, 
while it had collapsed upon its trellises, and said, "oh, i wish i 
had not associated with my lord anyone."731
43.
and there was for him no company to aid him other than allah,
nor could he defend himself.
44.
there732 the authority is [completely] for allah, the truth.  he 
is best in reward and best in outcome.
                                               
730i.e., proud and ungrateful to allah.
731he attributed his prosperity to himself rather than to allah and disbelieved 
in the account of the hereafter.
732i.e., at such a time or on the day of judgement.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
281
45.
and present to them the example of the life of this world, [its 
being] like rain which we send down from the sky, and the 
vegetation of the earth mingles with it733 and [then] it becomes 
dry remnants, scattered by the winds.  and allah is ever, over 
all things, perfect in ability.
46.
wealth and children are [but] adornment of the worldly life.  
but the enduring good deeds are better to your lord734 for 
reward and better for [one's] hope.
47.
and [warn of] the day when we will remove the mountains 
and you will see the earth prominent,735 and we will gather 
them and not leave behind from them anyone.
48.
and they will be presented before your lord in rows, [and he 
will say], "you have certainly come to us just as we created 
you the first time.  but you claimed that we would never make
for you an appointment."
49.
and the record [of deeds] will be placed [open], and you will 
see the criminals fearful of that within it, and they will say, 
"oh, woe to us!  what is this book that leaves nothing small 
or great except that it has enumerated it?"  and they will find 
what they did present [before them].  and your lord does 
injustice to no one.
50.
and [mention] when we said to the angels, "prostrate to adam,"
and they prostrated, except for iblees.  he was of the jinn and 
departed from [i.e., disobeyed] the command of his lord.  
then will you take him and his descendants as allies other 
than me while they are enemies to you?  wretched it is for the 
wrongdoers as an exchange.
51.
i did not make them witness to the creation of the heavens and 
the earth or to the creation of themselves, and i would not 
have taken the misguiders as assistants.
                                               
733absorbs it, growing lush and thick.
734i.e., in his sight or evaluation.
735i.e., bare and exposed.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
282
52.
and [warn of] the day when he will say, "call 'my partners' 
whom you claimed," and they will invoke them, but they will 
not respond to them.  and we will put between them [a valley 
of] destruction.
53.
and the criminals will see the fire and will be certain that they
are to fall therein.  and they will not find from it a way elsewhere.
54.
and we have certainly diversified in this quran for the people
from every [kind of] example; but man has ever been, most of 
anything, [prone to] dispute.
55.
and nothing has prevented the people from believing when 
guidance came to them and from asking forgiveness of their 
lord except that there [must] befall them the [accustomed] 
precedent of the former peoples736 or that the punishment 
should come [directly] before them.
56.
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good 
tidings and warners.  and those who disbelieve dispute by 
[using] falsehood to [attempt to] invalidate thereby the truth 
and have taken my verses, and that of which they are warned, 
in ridicule.
57.
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the 
verses of his lord but turns away from them and forgets what 
his hands have put forth?  indeed, we have placed over their 
hearts coverings, lest they understand it, and in their ears 
deafness.  and if you invite them to guidance – they will never
be guided, then – ever.
58.
and your lord is the forgiving, full of mercy.  if he were to 
impose blame upon them for what they earned, he would 
have hastened for them the punishment.  rather, for them is 
an appointment from which they will never find an escape.
59.
and those cities – we destroyed them when they wronged, 
and we made for their destruction an appointed time.
                                               
736who denied the truth brought by allah's messengers.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 15
283
60.
and [mention] when moses said to his boy [i.e., servant], "i 
will not cease [traveling] until i reach the junction of the two 
seas or continue for a long period."
61.
but when they reached the junction between them, they forgot 
their fish, and it took its course into the sea, slipping away.
62.
so when they had passed beyond it, [moses] said to his boy, 
"bring us our morning meal.  we have certainly suffered in this,
our journey, [much] fatigue."
63.
he said, "did you see when we retired to the rock?  indeed, i 
forgot [there] the fish.  and none made me forget it except 
satan – that i should mention it.  and it took its course into 
the sea amazingly."
64.
[moses] said, "that is what we were seeking."  so they returned,
following their footprints.
65.
and they found a servant from among our servants [i.e., 
al-khidhr] to whom we had given mercy from us and had 
taught him from us a [certain] knowledge.
66.
moses said to him, "may i follow you on [the condition] that you 
teach me from what you have been taught of sound judgement?"
67.
he said, "indeed, with me you will never be able to have patience.
68.
and how can you have patience for what you do not encompass
in knowledge?"
69.
[moses] said, "you will find me, if allah wills, patient, and i 
will not disobey you in [any] order."
70.
he said, "then if you follow me, do not ask me about anything 
until i make to you about it mention [i.e., explanation]."
71.
so they set out, until when they had embarked on the ship, he 
[i.e., al-khidhr] tore it open.  [moses] said, "have you torn it open 
to drown its people?  you have certainly done a grave thing."
72.
[al-khidhr] said, "did i not say that with me you would never 
be able to have patience?"
73.
[moses] said, "do not blame me for what i forgot and do not 
cover me in my matter with difficulty."

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 16
284
74.
so they set out, until when they met a boy, he [i.e., al-khidhr] 
killed him.  [moses] said, "have you killed a pure soul for 
other than [having killed] a soul?  you have certainly done a 
deplorable thing."
75.
[al-khidhr] said, "did i not tell you that with me you would 
never be able to have patience?"
76.
[moses] said, "if i should ask you about anything after this, 
then do not keep me as a companion.  you have obtained from 
me an excuse."
77.
so they set out, until when they came to the people of a town, 
they asked its people for food, but they refused to offer them 
hospitality.  and they found therein a wall about to collapse, 
so he [i.e., al-khidhr] restored it.  [moses] said, "if you wished,
you could have taken for it a payment."
78.
[al-khidhr] said, "this is parting between me and you.  i will 
inform you of the interpretation of that about which you could 
not have patience.
79.
as for the ship, it belonged to poor people working at sea.  so 
i intended to cause defect in it as there was after them a king 
who seized every [good] ship by force.
80.
and as for the boy, his parents were believers, and we feared 
that he would overburden them by transgression and disbelief.
81.
so we intended that their lord should substitute for them one 
better than him in purity and nearer to mercy.
82.
and as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, 
and there was beneath it a treasure for them, and their father 
had been righteous.  so your lord intended that they reach 
maturity and extract their treasure, as a mercy from your lord.  
and i did it not of my own accord.  that is the interpretation 
of that about which you could not have patience."
83.
and they ask you, [o muhammad], about dhul-qarnayn.  
say, "i will recite to you about him a report."
84.
indeed, we established him upon the earth, and we gave him 
to everything a way [i.e., means].

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 16
285
85.
so he followed a way
86.
until, when he reached the setting of the sun [i.e., the west], 
he found it [as if] setting in a spring of dark mud,737 and he 
found near it a people.  we [i.e., allah] said, "o dhul-qarnayn,
either you punish [them] or else adopt among them [a way of] 
goodness."
87.
he said, "as for one who wrongs,738 we will punish him.  then
he will be returned to his lord, and he will punish him with a 
terrible punishment [i.e., hellfire].
88.
but as for one who believes and does righteousness, he will have a 
reward of the best [i.e., paradise], and we [i.e., dhul-qarnayn] 
will speak to him from our command with ease."
89.
then he followed a way
90.
until, when he came to the rising of the sun [i.e., the east], he 
found it rising on a people for whom we had not made against 
it any shield.
91.
thus.739  and we had encompassed [all] that he had in 
knowledge.
92.
then he followed a way
93.
until, when he reached [a pass] between two mountains, he found
beside them a people who could hardly understand [his] speech.
94.
they said, "o dhul-qarnayn, indeed gog and magog740 are 
[great] corrupters in the land.  so may we assign for you an 
expenditure that you might make between us and them a 
barrier?"
95.
he said, "that in which my lord has established me is better 
[than what you offer], but assist me with strength [i.e., 
manpower]; i will make between you and them a dam.
                                               
737another meaning is "a hot spring."
738persists in disbelief and rebellion.
739such was the affair of dhul-qurnayn.
740savage tribes who had ravaged large parts of central asia, committing 
every kind of atrocity.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 16
286
96. bring me sheets of iron" – until, when he had leveled [them] 
between the two mountain walls, he said, "blow [with bellows],"
until when he had made it [like] fire, he said, "bring me, that i 
may pour over it molten copper."
97. so they [i.e., gog and magog] were unable to pass over it, nor 
were they able [to effect] in it any penetration.
98. [dhul-qarnayn] said, "this is a mercy from my lord; but 
when the promise of my lord741 comes [i.e., approaches], he 
will make it level, and ever is the promise of my lord true."
99. and we will leave them that day742 surging over each other, 
and [then] the horn will be blown, and we will assemble 
them in [one] assembly.
100. and we will present hell that day to the disbelievers, on 
display –
101. those whose eyes had been within a cover [removed] from 
my remembrance,743 and they were not able to hear.744
102. then do those who disbelieve think that they can take my 
servants instead of me as allies?  indeed, we have prepared 
hell for the disbelievers as a lodging.
103. say, [o muhammad], "shall we [believers] inform you of the 
greatest losers as to [their] deeds?
104. [they are] those whose effort is lost in worldly life, while 
they think that they are doing well in work."
105. those are the ones who disbelieve in the verses of their lord
and in [their] meeting him, so their deeds have become worthless;
and we will not assign to them on the day of resurrection 
any weight [i.e., importance].
106. that is their recompense – hell – for what they denied and 
[because] they took my signs and my messengers in ridicule.
                                               
741i.e., the hour of resurrection.
742the day the dam is destroyed.
743i.e., allah's signs or the quran.
744they refused to listen to the quran or to understand it.

surah 18 – al-kahf
juz 16
287
107. indeed, those who have believed and done righteous deeds –
they will have the gardens of paradise745 as a lodging,
108. wherein they abide eternally.  they will not desire from it any 
transfer.
109. say, "if the sea were ink for [writing] the words746 of my lord, 
the sea would be exhausted before the words of my lord were 
exhausted, even if we brought the like of it as a supplement."
110. say, "i am only a man like you, to whom has been revealed 
that your god is one god.  so whoever would hope for the 
meeting with his lord – let him do righteous work and not 
associate in the worship of his lord anyone."
                                               
745i.e., the highest part of paradise, al-firdaus.
746the words of allah's unlimited knowledge or words describing his attributes
and his grandeur or praise of him (subhanahu wa taala).


juz 16
288

747
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
kaf, ha, yœ, ayn, saad.748
2.
[this is] a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant 
zechariah
3.
when he called to his lord a private call [i.e., supplication].
4.
he said, "my lord, indeed my bones have weakened, and my 
head has filled749 with white, and never have i been in my 
supplication to you, my lord, unhappy [i.e., disappointed].
5.
and indeed, i fear the successors750 after me, and my wife has 
been barren, so give me from yourself an heir
6.
who will inherit me751 and inherit from the family of jacob.  
and make him, my lord, pleasing [to you]."
7.
[he was told],752 "o zechariah, indeed we give you good tidings 
of a boy whose name will be john.  we have not assigned to 
any before [this] name."
8.
he said, "my lord, how will i have a boy when my wife has 
been barren and i have reached extreme old age?"
9.
[an angel] said, "thus [it will be]; your lord says, 'it is easy 
for me, for i created you before, while you were nothing.'"
10.
[zechariah] said, "my lord, make for me a sign."  he said, 
"your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three 
nights, [being] sound."753
                                               
747maryam:  mary (the mother of prophet jesus).
748see footnote to 2:1.
749literally, "ignited."  the spread of white hair throughout the head is likened
to that of fire in the bush.
750those relatives from the father's side who would inherit religious authority.
751inherit from me religious knowledge and prophethood.
752by allah (subhanahu wa taala) through the angels.
753i.e., without illness or defect.


juz 16
289
11.
so he came out to his people from the prayer chamber and
signaled to them to exalt [allah] in the morning and afternoon.
12.
[allah said], "o john, take the scripture [i.e., adhere to it] with 
determination."  and we gave him judgement [while yet] a boy
13.
and affection from us and purity, and he was fearing of allah
14.
and dutiful to his parents, and he was not a disobedient tyrant.
15.
and peace be upon him the day he was born and the day he 
dies and the day he is raised alive.
16.
and mention, [o muhammad], in the book [the story of] mary,
when she withdrew from her family to a place toward the east.
17.
and she took, in seclusion from them, a screen.  then we sent 
to her our angel [i.e., gabriel], and he represented himself to 
her as a well-proportioned man.
18.
she said, "indeed, i seek refuge in the most merciful from you,
[so leave me], if you should be fearing of allah."
19.
he said, "i am only the messenger of your lord to give you 
[news of] a pure boy [i.e., son]."
20.
she said, "how can i have a boy while no man has touched 
me and i have not been unchaste?"
21.
he said, "thus [it will be]; your lord says, 'it is easy for me, 
and we will make him a sign to the people and a mercy from us.  
and it is a matter [already] decreed.'"
22.
so she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a remote 
place.
23.
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm 
tree.  she said, "oh, i wish i had died before this and was in 
oblivion, forgotten."
24.
but he754 called her from below her, "do not grieve; your lord
has provided beneath you a stream.
                                               
754there is a difference of opinion among scholars as to whether "he" refers 
to the baby or to the angel.


juz 16
290
25.
and shake toward you the trunk of the palm tree; it will drop 
upon you ripe, fresh dates.
26.
so eat and drink and be contented.  and if you see from among
humanity anyone, say, 'indeed, i have vowed to the most merciful
abstention, so i will not speak today to [any] man.'"
27.
then she brought him to her people, carrying him.  they said, 
"o mary, you have certainly done a thing unprecedented.
28.
o sister [i.e., descendant] of aaron, your father was not a man 
of evil, nor was your mother unchaste."
29.
so she pointed to him.  they said, "how can we speak to one 
who is in the cradle a child?"
30.
[jesus] said, "indeed, i am the servant of allah.  he has given 
me the scripture and made me a prophet.
31.
and he has made me blessed wherever i am and has enjoined 
upon me prayer and zakah as long as i remain alive
32.
and [made me] dutiful to my mother, and he has not made 
me a wretched tyrant.
33.
and peace is on me the day i was born and the day i will die 
and the day i am raised alive."
34.
that is jesus, the son of mary – the word of truth about which 
they are in dispute.
35.
it is not [befitting] for allah to take a son; exalted is he!755  
when he decrees an affair, he only says to it, "be," and it is.
36.
[jesus said], "and indeed, allah is my lord and your lord, so 
worship him.  that is a straight path."
37.
then the factions differed [concerning jesus] from among them,
so woe to those who disbelieved – from the scene of a tremendous
day.
38.
how [clearly] they will hear and see the day they come to us, 
but the wrongdoers today are in clear error.
                                               
755i.e., far removed is he from any such need.


juz 16
291
39.
and warn them, [o muhammad], of the day of regret, when 
the matter will be concluded;756 and [yet], they are in [a state 
of] heedlessness, and they do not believe.
40.
indeed, it is we who will inherit the earth and whoever is on it,
and to us they will be returned.
41.
and mention in the book [the story of] ibrahim.  indeed, he 
was a man of truth and a prophet.
42.
[mention] when he said to his father, "o my father, why do 
you worship that which does not hear and does not see and 
will not benefit you at all?
43.
o my father, indeed there has come to me of knowledge that 
which has not come to you, so follow me; i will guide you to 
an even path.
44.
o my father, do not worship [i.e., obey] satan.  indeed satan 
has ever been, to the most merciful, disobedient.
45.
o my father, indeed i fear that there will touch you a punishment
from the most merciful so you would be to satan a companion
[in hellfire]."
46.
[his father] said, "have you no desire for my gods, o ibrahim?  
if you do not desist, i will surely stone you, so avoid me a 
prolonged time."
47.
[ibrahim] said, "peace [i.e., safety] will be upon you.757  i 
will ask forgiveness for you of my lord.  indeed, he is ever 
gracious to me.
48.
and i will leave you and those you invoke other than allah and 
will invoke my lord.  i expect that i will not be in invocation 
to my lord unhappy [i.e., disappointed]."
49.
so when he had left them and those they worshipped other 
than allah, we gave him isaac and jacob, and each [of them] 
we made a prophet.
                                               
756i.e., "judged" or "accomplished."
757meaning "you are secure" or "i will not harm you."


juz 16
292
50.
and we gave them of our mercy, and we made for them a 
mention [i.e., reputation] of high honor.
51.
and mention in the book, moses.  indeed, he was chosen, and 
he was a messenger and a prophet.758
52.
and we called him from the side of the mount759 at [his] right 
and brought him near, confiding [to him].
53.
and we gave him out of our mercy his brother aaron as a 
prophet.
54.
and mention in the book, ishmael.  indeed, he was true to his 
promise, and he was a messenger and a prophet.
55.
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and was 
to his lord pleasing [i.e., accepted by him].
56.
and mention in the book, idrees.  indeed, he was a man of 
truth and a prophet.
57.
and we raised him to a high station.
58.
those were the ones upon whom allah bestowed favor from 
among the prophets of the descendants of adam and of those 
we carried [in the ship] with noah, and of the descendants of 
ibrahim and israel [i.e., jacob], and of those whom we 
guided and chose.  when the verses of the most merciful were 
recited to them, they fell in prostration and weeping.
59.
but there came after them successors [i.e., later generations] 
who neglected prayer and pursued desires; so they are going 
to meet evil760 –
60.
except those who repent, believe and do righteousness; for 
those will enter paradise and will not be wronged at all.
61.
[therein are] gardens of perpetual residence which the most
                                               
758a messenger (rasul) is one who was charged by allah to reform society.  
a prophet (nab¥) is one who received revelation from allah, the latter 
being more numerous than the former.
759mount sinai.
760described as a valley in hell or may be rendered "the consequence of error."


juz 16
293
merciful has promised his servants in the unseen.  indeed, his
promise has ever been eminent.761
62.
they will not hear therein any ill speech – only [greetings of] 
peace – and they will have their provision therein, morning 
and afternoon.
63.
that is paradise, which we give as inheritance to those of our 
servants who were fearing of allah.
64.
[gabriel said],762 "and we [angels] descend not except by the 
order of your lord.  to him belongs that before us and that 
behind us and what is in between.  and never is your lord 
forgetful –
65.
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between 
them – so worship him and have patience for his worship.  
do you know of any similarity to him?"
66.
and man [i.e., the disbeliever] says, "when i have died, am i 
going to be brought forth alive?"
67.
does man not remember that we created him before, while he 
was nothing?
68.
so by your lord, we will surely gather them and the devils; 
then we will bring them to be present around hell upon their 
knees.763
69.
then we will surely extract from every sect those of them 
who were worst against the most merciful in insolence.
70.
then, surely it is we who are most knowing of those most 
worthy of burning therein.
71.
and there is none of you except he will come to it.764  this is 
upon your lord an inevitability decreed.
                                               
761literally, "that to which all will come."
762in answer to the prophet's wish that gabriel would visit him more often.
763i.e., fallen on their knees from terror or dragged there unwillingly on their 
knees.
764i.e., be exposed to it.  however, the people of paradise will not be harmed 
thereby.


juz 16
294
72.
then we will save those who feared allah and leave the 
wrongdoers within it, on their knees.
73.
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "which of [our] 
two parties is best in position and best in association?"765
74.
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them 
who were better in possessions and [outward] appearance?
75.
say, "whoever is in error – let the most merciful extend for him 
an extension [in wealth and time] until, when they see that 
which they were promised – either punishment [in this world] 
or the hour [of resurrection] – they will come to know who is 
worst in position and weaker in soldiers."
76.
and allah increases those who were guided, in guidance, and 
the enduring good deeds are better to your lord766 for reward 
and better for recourse.
77.
then, have you seen he who disbelieved in our verses and said,
"i will surely be given wealth and children [in the next life]"?
78.
has he looked into the unseen, or has he taken from the most 
merciful a promise?
79.
no!  we will record what he says and extend [i.e., increase] 
for him from the punishment extensively.
80.
and we will inherit him [in] what he mentions,767 and he will 
come to us alone.
81.
and they have taken besides allah [false] deities that they 
would be for them [a source of] honor.
82.
no!  they [i.e., those "gods"] will deny their worship of them
and will be against them opponents [on the day of judgement].
83.
do you not see that we have sent the devils upon the disbelievers,
inciting them [to evil] with [constant] incitement?
                                               
765in regard to worldly interests.
766i.e., in the sight or evaluation of allah.
767instead of giving him wealth and children in the hereafter, allah will 
take from him those he had in worldly life at the time of his death.


juz 16
295
84.
so be not impatient over them.  we only count out [i.e., allow]
to them a [limited] number.768
85.
on the day we will gather the righteous to the most merciful 
as a delegation
86.
and will drive the criminals to hell in thirst
87.
none will have [power of] intercession except he who had taken
from the most merciful a covenant.769
88.
and they say, "the most merciful has taken [for himself] a son."
89.
you have done an atrocious thing.
90.
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth splits open
and the mountains collapse in devastation
91.
that they attribute to the most merciful a son.
92.
and it is not appropriate for the most merciful that he should 
take a son.
93.
there is no one in the heavens and earth but that he comes to 
the most merciful as a servant.
94.
he has enumerated them and counted them a [full] counting.
95.
and all of them are coming to him on the day of resurrection
alone.
96.
indeed, those who have believed and done righteous deeds –
the most merciful will appoint for them affection.770
97.
so, [o muhammad], we have only made it [i.e., the quran] 
easy in your tongue [i.e., the arabic language] that you may 
give good tidings thereby to the righteous and warn thereby a 
hostile people.
98.
and how many have we destroyed before them of generations?  
do you perceive of them anyone or hear from them a sound?
                                               
768of breaths, of days, or of evil deeds.
769not to worship other than him.
770from himself and from among each other.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
296
surah ta ha
771
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
$œ, ha.772
2.
we have not sent down to you the quran that you be distressed
3.
but only as a reminder for those who fear [allah] –
4.
a revelation from he who created the earth and highest heavens,
5.
the most merciful [who is] above the throne established.773
6.
to him belongs what is in the heavens and what is on the earth
and what is between them and what is under the soil.
7.
and if you speak aloud – then indeed, he knows the secret 
and what is [even] more hidden.
8.
allah – there is no deity except him.  to him belong the best 
names.
9.
and has the story of moses reached you? –
10.
when he saw a fire and said to his family, "stay here; indeed, 
i have perceived a fire; perhaps i can bring you a torch or find 
at the fire some guidance."
11.
and when he came to it, he was called, "o moses,
12.
indeed, i am your lord, so remove your sandals.  indeed, you 
are in the sacred valley of tuwa.
13.
and i have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed [to you].
14.
indeed, i am allah.  there is no deity except me, so worship 
me and establish prayer for my remembrance.
15.
indeed, the hour is coming – i almost conceal it774 – so that every
soul may be recompensed according to that for which it strives.
                                               
771ta ha:  (the letters) ‹œ and ha.
772see footnote to 2:1.
773i.e., having ascendancy over all creation.  see footnote to 2:19.
774meaning that allah (subhanahu wa taala) keeps knowledge of the hour 
hidden from everyone except himself.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
297
16.
so do not let one avert you from it775 who does not believe in 
it and follows his desire, for you [then] would perish.
17.
and what is that in your right hand, o moses?"
18.
he said, "it is my staff; i lean upon it, and i bring down leaves 
for my sheep and i have therein other uses."
19.
[allah] said, "throw it down, o moses."
20.
so he threw it down, and thereupon it was a snake, moving 
swiftly.
21.
[allah] said, "seize it and fear not; we will return it to its 
former condition.
22.
and draw in your hand to your side; it will come out white 
without disease – another sign,
23.
that we may show you [some] of our greater signs.
24.
go to pharaoh.  indeed, he has transgressed [i.e., tyrannized]."
25.
[moses] said, "my lord, expand [i.e., relax] for me my breast 
[with assurance]
26.
and ease for me my task
27.
and untie the knot from my tongue 
28.
that they may understand my speech.
29.
and appoint for me a minister [i.e., assistant] from my family –
30.
aaron, my brother.
31.
increase through him my strength
32.
and let him share my task
33.
that we may exalt you much
34.
and remember you much.
35.
indeed, you are of us ever seeing."
36.
[allah] said, "you have been granted your request, o moses.
                                               
775from preparation for the hour or for the hereafter.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
298
37.
and we had already conferred favor upon you another time,
38.
when we inspired to your mother what we inspired,
39.
[saying], 'cast him into the chest and cast it into the river, and 
the river will throw it onto the bank; there will take him an 
enemy to me and an enemy to him.'  and i bestowed upon you 
love from me776 that you would be brought up under my eye 
[i.e., observation and care].
40.
[and we favored you] when your sister went and said, 'shall i 
direct you to someone who will be responsible for him?'  so we
restored you to your mother that she might be content and not 
grieve.  and you killed someone,777 but we saved you from 
retaliation and tried you with a [severe] trial.  and you remained
[some] years among the people of madyan.  then you came
[here] at the decreed time, o moses.
41.
and i produced you for myself.778
42.
go, you and your brother, with my signs and do not slacken 
in my remembrance.
43.
go, both of you, to pharaoh.  indeed, he has transgressed.
44.
and speak to him with gentle speech that perhaps he may be 
reminded or fear [allah]."
45.
they said, "our lord, indeed we are afraid that he will hasten 
[punishment] against us or that he will transgress."
46.
[allah] said, "fear not.  indeed, i am with you both; i hear and 
i see.
47.
so go to him and say, 'indeed, we are messengers of your lord,
so send with us the children of israel and do not torment them.  
we have come to you with a sign from your lord.  and peace779
will be upon he who follows the guidance.
                                               
776allah put love of moses into the hearts of the people.
777the copt who died after being struck by moses.
778allah had already selected moses and made him strong in body and 
character according to the requirements of his mission.
779i.e., safety and security from allah's punishment.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
299
48.
indeed, it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be 
upon whoever denies and turns away.'"
49.
[pharaoh] said, "so who is the lord of you two, o moses?"
50.
he said, "our lord is he who gave each thing its form and 
then guided [it]."
51.
[pharaoh] said, "then what is the case of the former generations?"
52.
[moses] said, "the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a 
record.  my lord neither errs nor forgets."
53.
[it is he] who has made for you the earth as a bed [spread out] 
and inserted therein for you roadways and sent down from the 
sky, rain and produced thereby categories of various plants.
54.
eat [therefrom] and pasture your livestock.  indeed in that are 
signs for those of intelligence.
55.
from it [i.e., the earth] we created you, and into it we will 
return you, and from it we will extract you another time.
56.
and we certainly showed him [i.e., pharaoh] our signs – all 
of them – but he denied and refused.
57.
he said, "have you come to us to drive us out of our land with 
your magic, o moses?
58.
then we will surely bring you magic like it, so make between 
us and you an appointment, which we will not fail to keep and 
neither will you, in a place assigned."780
59.
[moses] said, "your appointment is on the day of the festival 
when the people assemble at mid-morning."781
60.
so pharaoh went away, put together his plan, and then came 
[to moses].
61.
moses said to them [i.e., the magicians summoned by pharaoh],
"woe to you!  do not invent a lie against allah or he will 
exterminate you with a punishment; and he has failed who 
invents [such falsehood]."
                                               
780literally, "marked," as to be known.  another meaning is "a place midway
[between us]" or "a level place."
781so that the signs of allah would be seen clearly.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
300
62.
so they disputed over their affair among themselves and 
concealed their private conversation.
63.
they said, "indeed, these are two magicians who want to drive
you out of your land with their magic and do away with your 
most exemplary way [i.e., religion or tradition].
64.
so resolve upon your plan and then come [forward] in line.  
and he has succeeded today who overcomes."
65.
they said, "o moses, either you throw or we will be the first 
to throw."
66.
he said, "rather, you throw."  and suddenly their ropes and 
staffs seemed to him from their magic that they were moving 
[like snakes].
67.
and he sensed within himself apprehension, did moses.
68.
we [i.e., allah] said, "fear not.  indeed, it is you who are superior.
69.
and throw what is in your right hand; it will swallow up what 
they have crafted.  what they have crafted is but the trick of a 
magician, and the magician will not succeed wherever he is."
70.
so the magicians fell down in prostration.782  they said, "we 
have believed in the lord of aaron and moses."
71.
[pharaoh] said, "you believed him [i.e., moses] before i gave 
you permission.  indeed, he is your leader who has taught you 
magic.  so i will surely cut off your hands and your feet on 
opposite sides, and i will crucify you on the trunks of palm trees,
and you will surely know which of us is more severe in [giving] 
punishment and more enduring."
72.
they said, "never will we prefer you over what has come to 
us of clear proofs and [over] he who created us.783  so decree 
whatever you are to decree.  you can only decree for this 
worldly life.
                                               
782after they had seen the miracles which allah had given moses and that 
they were realities and not merely impressions of magic.
783this phrase has also been interpreted as an oath, i.e., "...by him who 
created us."

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
301
73.
indeed, we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us 
our sins and what you compelled us [to do] of magic.  and 
allah is better and more enduring."784
74.
indeed, whoever comes to his lord as a criminal – indeed, for 
him is hell; he will neither die therein nor live.
75.
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done righteous
deeds – for those will be the highest degrees [in position]:
76.
gardens of perpetual residence beneath which rivers flow, 
wherein they abide eternally.  and that is the reward of one 
who purifies himself.785
77.
and we had inspired to moses, "travel by night with my 
servants and strike for them a dry path through the sea; you 
will not fear being overtaken [by pharaoh] nor be afraid [of 
drowning]."
78.
so pharaoh pursued them with his soldiers, and there covered 
them from the sea that which covered them,786
79.
and pharaoh led his people astray and did not guide [them].
80.
o children of israel, we delivered you from your enemy, and 
we made an appointment with you787 at the right side of the 
mount, and we sent down to you manna and quails,
81.
[saying], "eat from the good things with which we have 
provided you and do not transgress [or oppress others] therein, 
lest my anger should descend upon you.  and he upon whom 
my anger descends has certainly fallen [i.e., perished]."
82.
but indeed, i am the perpetual forgiver of whoever repents and
believes and does righteousness and then continues in guidance.
83.
[allah said], "and what made you hasten from your people, o 
moses?"
                                               
784in reward and in punishment.
785from all uncleanliness, the greatest of which is worship and obedience to 
other than allah.
786i.e., not only the water but that which only allah knows – terror, pain, 
regret, etc.
787i.e., with your prophet, to receive the scripture for you.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
302
84.
he said, "they are close upon my tracks, and i hastened to you,
my lord, that you be pleased."
85.
[allah] said, "but indeed, we have tried your people after you 
[departed], and the samiri788 has led them astray."
86.
so moses returned to his people, angry and grieved.789  he said,
"o my people, did your lord not make you a good promise?790  
then, was the time [of its fulfillment] too long for you, or did 
you wish that wrath from your lord descend upon you, so you 
broke your promise [of obedience] to me?"
87.
they said, "we did not break our promise to you by our will, 
but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the 
people [of pharaoh], so we threw them [into the fire], and thus 
did the samiri throw."
88.
and he extracted for them [the statue of] a calf which had a 
lowing sound, and they said, "this is your god and the god of 
moses, but he forgot."
89.
did they not see that it could not return to them any speech 
[i.e., response] and that it did not possess for them any harm 
or benefit?
90.
and aaron had already told them before [the return of moses], 
"o my people, you are only being tested by it, and indeed, 
your lord is the most merciful, so follow me and obey my order."
91.
they said, "we will never cease being devoted to it [i.e., the 
calf] until moses returns to us."
92.
[moses] said, "o aaron, what prevented you, when you saw 
them going astray,
93.
from following me?  then have you disobeyed my order?"
94.
[aaron] said, "o son of my mother, do not seize [me] by my 
beard or by my head.  indeed, i feared that you would say, 
                                               
788translated as "the samaritan" (from samaria), a hypocrite among them 
who led the children of israel into idol-worship.
789the meaning may also be "angry and enraged."
790that he would send down the torah, containing guidance for you.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
303
'you caused division among the children of israel, and you 
did not observe [or await] my word.'"
95. [moses] said, "and what is your case, o samiri?"
96. he said, "i saw what they did not see, so i took a handful [of dust]
from the track of the messenger791 and threw it,792 and thus did 
my soul entice me."
97. [moses] said, "then go.  and indeed, it is [decreed] for you in 
[this] life to say, 'no contact.'793  and indeed, you have an 
appointment [in the hereafter] you will not fail to keep.  and look
at your 'god' to which you remained devoted.  we will surely 
burn it and blow it [i.e., its ashes] into the sea with a blast.
98. your god is only allah, except for whom there is no deity.  he 
has encompassed all things in knowledge."
99. thus, [o muhammad], we relate to you from the news of what
has preceded.  and we have certainly given you from us a 
message [i.e., the quran].
100. whoever turns away from it – then indeed, he will bear on the 
day of resurrection a burden [i.e., great sin],
101. [abiding] eternally therein,794 and evil it is for them on the 
day of resurrection as a load –
102. the day the horn will be blown.  and we will gather the 
criminals, that day, blue-eyed.795
103. they will murmur among themselves, "you remained not but 
ten [days in the world]."
104. we are most knowing of what they say when the best of them 
in manner [i.e., wisdom or speech] will say, "you remained 
not but one day."
                                               
791i.e., a hoof-print in the sand left by the angel gabriel's horse.
792into the fire upon the melted ornaments in order to form the calf.
793i.e., do not touch me.  as chastisement, he was to be completely shunned 
by all people.
794i.e., in the state of sin.
795from terror, or blinded completely.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
304
105. and they ask you about the mountains, so say, "my lord will 
blow them away with a blast.796
106. and he will leave it [i.e., the earth] a level plain;
107. you will not see therein a depression or an elevation."
108. that day, they [i.e., everyone] will follow [the call of] the
caller797 [with] no deviation therefrom, and [all] voices will 
be stilled before the most merciful, so you will not hear except
a whisper [of footsteps].
109. that day, no intercession will benefit except [that of] one to 
whom the most merciful has given permission and has accepted
his word.
110. he [i.e., allah] knows what is [presently] before them and 
what will be after them,798 but they do not encompass it [i.e., 
what he knows] in knowledge.
111. and [all] faces will be humbled before the ever-living, the 
sustainer of existence.  and he will have failed who carries 
injustice.799
112. but he who does of righteous deeds while he is a believer – he 
will neither fear injustice nor deprivation.
113. and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran800 and 
have diversified therein the warnings that perhaps they will 
avoid [sin] or it would cause them remembrance.
114. so high [above all] is allah, the sovereign, the truth.  and, 
[o muhammad], do not hasten with [recitation of] the quran 
before its revelation is completed to you, and say, "my lord, 
increase me in knowledge."
115. and we had already taken a promise from adam before, but 
he forgot; and we found not in him determination.801
                                               
796once they have been reduced to dust.
797to the gathering for judgement.
798see footnote to 2:255.
799i.e., sin or wrongdoing towards allah or any of his creation.
800i.e., revealed in the arabic language.
801to resist temptation.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
305
116. and [mention] when we said to the angels, "prostrate to adam,"
and they prostrated, except iblees;802 he refused.
117. so we said, "o adam, indeed this is an enemy to you and to 
your wife.  then let him not remove you from paradise so you 
would suffer.
118. indeed, it is [promised] for you not to be hungry therein or be 
unclothed.
119. and indeed, you will not be thirsty therein or be hot from the sun."
120. then satan whispered to him; he said, "o adam, shall i direct 
you to the tree of eternity and possession that will not deteriorate?"
121. and they [i.e., adam and his wife] ate of it, and their private 
parts became apparent to them, and they began to fasten over 
themselves from the leaves of paradise.  and adam disobeyed 
his lord and erred.
122. then his lord chose him and turned to him in forgiveness and 
guided [him].
123. [allah] said, "descend from it [i.e., paradise] – all, [your 
descendants] being enemies to one another.  and if there should
come to you guidance from me – then whoever follows my 
guidance will neither go astray [in the world] nor suffer [in the 
hereafter].
124. and whoever turns away from my remembrance – indeed, he 
will have a depressed [i.e., difficult] life, and we will gather 
[i.e., raise] him on the day of resurrection blind."
125. he will say, "my lord, why have you raised me blind while i 
was [once] seeing?"
126. [allah] will say, "thus did our signs come to you, and you forgot
[i.e., disregarded] them; and thus will you this day be forgotten."
127. and thus do we recompense he who transgressed and did not 
believe in the signs of his lord.  and the punishment of the 
hereafter is more severe and more enduring.803
                                               
802see footnote to 2:34.
803than that of this world.

surah 20 – ta ha
juz 16
306
128. then, has it not become clear to them how many generations 
we destroyed before them as they walk among their 
dwellings?  indeed in that are signs for those of intelligence.
129. and if not for a word804 that preceded from your lord, it [i.e., 
punishment] would have been an obligation [due immediately],805
and [if not for] a specified term [decreed].
130. so be patient over what they say and exalt [allah] with praise 
of your lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting; 
and during periods of the night [exalt him] and at the ends of 
the day, that you may be satisfied.
131. and do not extend your eyes toward that by which we have 
given enjoyment to [some] categories of them, [its being but] 
the splendor of worldly life by which we test them.  and the 
provision of your lord is better and more enduring.
132. and enjoin prayer upon your family [and people] and be 
steadfast therein.  we ask you not for provision; we provide 
for you, and the [best] outcome is for [those of] righteousness.
133. and they say, "why does he not bring us a sign from his lord?"  
has there not come to them evidence of what was in the former
scriptures?806
134. and if we had destroyed them with a punishment before him,807
they would have said, "our lord, why did you not send to us 
a messenger so we could have followed your verses [i.e., 
teachings] before we were humiliated and disgraced?"
135. say, "each [of us] is waiting;808 so wait.  for you will know 
who are the companions of the sound path and who is guided."
                                               
804see footnote to 10:19.
805allah would have punished the disbelievers in this world as he did with 
previous peoples.
806is not the quran an adequate proof of muhammad's prophethood and 
sufficient as a lasting miracle?
807prophet muhammad ().  also interpreted as "before it," i.e., the quran.
808for the outcome of this matter.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
307
surah al-anbiya
809
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
[the time of] their account has approached for the people, 
while they are in heedlessness turning away.
2.
no mention [i.e., revelation] comes to them anew from their 
lord except that they listen to it while they are at play
3.
with their hearts distracted.  and those who do wrong conceal 
their private conversation, [saying], "is this [prophet] except a 
human being like you?  so would you approach magic while 
you are aware [of it]?"
4.
he [the prophet ()] said, "my lord knows whatever is said 
throughout the heaven and earth, and he is the hearing, the 
knowing."
5.
but they say, "[the revelation is but] a mixture of false dreams;
rather, he has invented it; rather, he is a poet.  so let him bring us a 
sign just as the previous [messengers] were sent [with miracles]."
6.
not a [single] city which we destroyed believed before them,810
so will they believe?
7.
and we sent not before you, [o muhammad], except men to 
whom we revealed [the message], so ask the people of the 
message [i.e., former scriptures] if you do not know.
8.
and we did not make them [i.e., the prophets] forms not eating
food,811 nor were they immortal [on earth].
9.
then812 we fulfilled for them the promise, and we saved them 
and whom we willed and destroyed the transgressors.
10.
we have certainly sent down to you a book [i.e., the quran] 
in which is your mention.813  then will you not reason?
                                               
809al-anbiya:  the prophets.
810even though they had witnessed signs and miracles.
811like the angels.  rather, they were human beings with human attributes.
812once they had conveyed the message.
813this implies the honor of having been mentioned or addressed.  another 
meaning is "your reminder."

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
308
11.
and how many a city which was unjust814 have we shattered 
and produced after it another people.
12.
and when they [i.e., its inhabitants] perceived our punishment,
at once they fled from it.
13.
[some angels said], "do not flee but return to where you 
were given luxury and to your homes – perhaps you will be 
questioned."815
14.
they said, "o woe to us! indeed, we were wrongdoers."
15.
and that declaration of theirs did not cease until we made 
them [as] a harvest [mowed down], extinguished [like a fire].
16.
and we did not create the heaven and earth and that between 
them in play.
17.
had we intended to take a diversion,816 we could have taken 
it from [what is] with us – if [indeed] we were to do so.
18.
rather, we dash the truth upon falsehood, and it destroys it,817
and thereupon it departs.  and for you is destruction from that 
which you describe.818
19.
to him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth.  and 
those near him [i.e., the angels] are not prevented by arrogance
from his worship, nor do they tire.
20.
they exalt [him] night and day [and] do not slacken.
21.
or have they [i.e., men] taken for themselves gods from the 
earth who resurrect [the dead]?
22.
had there been within them [i.e., the heavens and earth] gods 
besides allah, they both would have been ruined.  so exalted 
is allah, lord of the throne, above what they describe.
23.
he is not questioned about what he does, but they will be 
questioned.
                                               
814i.e., its inhabitants persisting in wrongdoing.
815about what happened to you.  this is said to them in sarcasm and ridicule.
816such as a wife or a child.
817literally, "strikes its brain," disabling or killing it.
818of untruth concerning allah, particularly here, the claim that he has a 
son or other "partner" in divinity.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
309
24.
or have they taken gods besides him?  say, [o muhammad], 
"produce your proof.  this [quran] is the message for those 
with me and the message of those before me."819  but most of 
them do not know the truth, so they are turning away.
25.
and we sent not before you any messenger except that we 
revealed to him that, "there is no deity except me, so worship 
me."
26.
and they say, "the most merciful has taken a son."  exalted 
is he!  rather, they820 are [but] honored servants.
27.
they cannot precede him in word, and they act by his command.
28.
he knows what is [presently] before them and what will be 
after them,821 and they cannot intercede except on behalf of 
one whom he approves.  and they, from fear of him, are 
apprehensive.
29.
and whoever of them should say, "indeed, i am a god besides 
him" – that one we would recompense with hell.  thus do 
we recompense the wrongdoers.
30.
have those who disbelieved not considered that the heavens 
and the earth were a joined entity, and we separated them and 
made from water every living thing?  then will they not believe?
31.
and we placed within the earth firmly set mountains, lest it
should shift with them, and we made therein [mountain] passes
[as] roads that they might be guided.
32.
and we made the sky a protected ceiling, but they, from its 
signs,822 are turning away.
33.
and it is he who created the night and the day and the sun 
and the moon; all [heavenly bodies] in an orbit are swimming.
                                               
819all previous prophets called for the worship of allah alone.
820those they claim to be "children" of allah, such as the angels, ezra, 
jesus, etc.
821see footnote to 2:255.
822the signs present in the heavens.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
310
34.
and we did not grant to any man before you eternity [on earth];
so if you die – would they be eternal?
35.
every soul will taste death.  and we test you with evil and 
with good as trial; and to us you will be returned.
36.
and when those who disbelieve see you, [o muhammad], 
they take you not except in ridicule, [saying], "is this the one 
who mentions [i.e., insults] your gods?"  and they are, at the 
mention of the most merciful, disbelievers.
37.
man was created of haste [i.e., impatience].  i will show you 
my signs [i.e., vengeance], so do not impatiently urge me.
38.
and they say, "when is this promise, if you should be truthful?"
39.
if those who disbelieved but knew the time when they will not 
avert the fire from their faces or from their backs and they 
will not be aided...823
40.
rather, it will come to them unexpectedly and bewilder them, 
and they will not be able to repel it, nor will they be reprieved.
41.
and already were messengers ridiculed before you, but those 
who mocked them were enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
42.
say, "who can protect you at night or by day from the most 
merciful?"  but they are, from the remembrance of their lord, 
turning away.
43.
or do they have gods to defend them other than us?  they are 
unable [even] to help themselves, nor can they be protected 
from us.
44.
but, [on the contrary], we have provided good things for these 
[disbelievers] and their fathers until life was prolonged for them.  
then do they not see that we set upon the land, reducing it from
its borders?824  is it they who will overcome?
45.
say, "i only warn you by revelation."  but the deaf do not hear 
the call when they are warned.
                                               
823the completion of the sentence is understood to be "...they would not be 
asking in disbelief and ridicule to be shown the punishment."
824see footnote to 13:41.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
311
46.
and if [as much as] a whiff of the punishment of your lord 
should touch them, they would surely say, "o woe to us!  
indeed, we have been wrongdoers."
47.
and we place the scales of justice for the day of resurrection, 
so no soul will be treated unjustly at all.  and if there is [even] 
the weight of a mustard seed,825 we will bring it forth.  and 
sufficient are we as accountant.
48.
and we had already given moses and aaron the criterion and 
a light and a reminder826 for the righteous
49.
who fear their lord unseen,827 while they are of the hour 
apprehensive.
50.
and this [quran] is a blessed message which we have sent 
down.  then are you with it unacquainted?828
51.
and we had certainly given ibrahim his sound judgement 
before,829 and we were of him well-knowing
52.
when he said to his father and his people, "what are these 
statues to which you are devoted?"
53.
they said, "we found our fathers worshippers of them."
54.
he said, "you were certainly, you and your fathers, in manifest
error."
55.
they said, "have you come to us with truth, or are you of 
those who jest?"
56.
he said, "[no], rather, your lord is the lord of the heavens 
and the earth who created them, and i, to that, am of those 
who testify.
57.
and [i swear] by allah, i will surely plan against your idols 
after you have turned and gone away."
                                               
825i.e., anything as small or insignificant as a mustard seed.
826these are three qualities of the torah.
827which can mean "him being unseen" by them or "though they are unseen"
by others.
828i.e., pretending ignorance, disapproving or refusing to acknowledge it?
829i.e., before moses.  allah had guided him from early youth.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
312
58.
so he made them into fragments, except a large one among them,
that they might return to it [and question].
59.
they said, "who has done this to our gods?  indeed, he is of 
the wrongdoers."
60.
they said, "we heard a young man mention them who is called
ibrahim."
61.
they said, "then bring him before the eyes of the people that 
they may testify."830
62.
they said, "have you done this to our gods, o ibrahim?"
63.
he said, "rather, this – the largest of them – did it, so ask them,
if they should [be able to] speak."
64.
so they returned to [blaming] themselves and said [to each other],
"indeed, you are the wrongdoers."
65.
then they reversed themselves,831 [saying], "you have already 
known that these do not speak!"
66.
he said, "then do you worship instead of allah that which 
does not benefit you at all or harm you?
67.
uff832 to you and to what you worship instead of allah.  then 
will you not use reason?"
68.
they said, "burn him and support your gods – if you are to act."
69.
we [i.e., allah] said, "o fire, be coolness and safety upon 
ibrahim."
70.
and they intended for him a plan [i.e., harm], but we made 
them the greatest losers.
71.
and we delivered him and lot to the land which we had 
blessed for the worlds [i.e., peoples].
                                               
830to what they had heard him say.  it may also mean "...that they may 
witness [what will be done to him as punishment]."
831after first admitting their error, they were seized by pride and obstinacy.
832an exclamation of anger and displeasure.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
313
72.
and we gave him isaac and jacob in addition, and all [of them]
we made righteous.
73.
and we made them leaders guiding by our command.  and we 
inspired to them the doing of good deeds, establishment of 
prayer, and giving of zakah; and they were worshippers of us.
74.
and to lot we gave judgement and knowledge, and we saved 
him from the city that was committing wicked deeds.  indeed, 
they were a people of evil, defiantly disobedient.
75.
and we admitted him into our mercy.  indeed, he was of the 
righteous.
76.
and [mention] noah, when he called [to allah]833 before [that 
time], so we responded to him and saved him and his family 
from the great affliction [i.e., the flood].
77.
and we aided [i.e., saved] him from the people who denied 
our signs.  indeed, they were a people of evil, so we drowned 
them, all together.
78.
and [mention] david and solomon, when they judged concerning
the field – when the sheep of a people overran it [at night],834
and we were witness to their judgement.
79.
and we gave understanding of it [i.e., the case] to solomon, 
and to each [of them] we gave judgement and knowledge.  
and we subjected the mountains to exalt [us], along with 
david and [also] the birds.  and we were doing [that].835
80.
and we taught him the fashioning of coats of armor to protect 
you from your [enemy in] battle.  so will you then be grateful?
81.
and to solomon [we subjected] the wind, blowing forcefully, 
proceeding by his command toward the land which we had 
blessed.  and we are ever, of all things, knowing.
                                               
833i.e., supplicated against his people who had persisted in denial and animosity.  
see 71:26-28.
834eating and destroying the crops.
835meaning that allah has always been capable of accomplishing whatever 
he wills.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
314
82.
and of the devils [i.e., jinn] were those who dived for him and 
did work other than that.  and we were of them a guardian.836
83.
and [mention] job, when he called to his lord, "indeed, adversity
has touched me, and you are the most merciful of the merciful."
84.
so we responded to him and removed what afflicted him of 
adversity.  and we gave him [back] his family and the like 
thereof with them as mercy from us and a reminder for the 
worshippers [of allah].
85.
and [mention] ishmael and idrees and dhul-kifl; all were of 
the patient.
86.
and we admitted them into our mercy.  indeed, they were of 
the righteous.
87.
and [mention] the man of the fish [i.e., jonah], when he went off
in anger837 and thought that we would not decree [anything] 
upon him.838  and he called out within the darknesses,839
"there is no deity except you; exalted are you.  indeed, i have
been of the wrongdoers."
88.
so we responded to him and saved him from the distress.  
and thus do we save the believers.
89.
and [mention] zechariah, when he called to his lord, "my lord,
do not leave me alone [with no heir], while you are the best of
inheritors."
90.
so we responded to him, and we gave to him john, and 
amended for him his wife.  indeed, they used to hasten to good
deeds and supplicate us in hope and fear, and they were to us 
humbly submissive.
91.
and [mention] the one who guarded her chastity [i.e., mary], 
so we blew into her [garment] through our angel [i.e., gabriel],
and we made her and her son a sign for the worlds.
                                               
836preventing any disobedience or deviation by them from solomon's instructions
and protecting him from being harmed by them.
837at the disbelief of his people.
838or "would not restrict him" in the belly of the fish.
839that of the night, of the sea, and of the fish's interior.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
315
92. indeed this, your religion, is one religion,840 and i am your lord,
so worship me.
93. and [yet] they divided their affair [i.e., that of their religion] 
among themselves,841 [but] all to us will return.
94. so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer – no 
denial will there be for his effort,842 and indeed we [i.e., our 
angels], of it, are recorders.
95. and it is prohibited to [the people of] a city which we have 
destroyed that they will [ever] return843
96. until when [the dam of] gog and magog has been opened and 
they, from every elevation, descend
97. and [when] the true promise [i.e., the resurrection] has 
approached; then suddenly the eyes of those who disbelieved 
will be staring [in horror, while they say], "o woe to us; we 
had been unmindful of this; rather, we were wrongdoers."
98. indeed, you [disbelievers] and what you worship other than
allah are the firewood of hell.  you will be coming to [enter] it.
99. had these [false deities] been [actual] gods, they would not 
have come to it, but all are eternal therein.
100. for them therein is heavy sighing, and they therein will not hear.
101. indeed, those for whom the best [reward] has preceded from 
us – they are from it far removed.
102. they will not hear its sound, while they are, in that which their
souls desire, abiding eternally.
103. they will not be grieved by the greatest terror,844 and the angels
will meet them, [saying], "this is your day which you have 
been promised" –
                                               
840i.e., a collective way of life or course of conduct followed by a community.
841becoming sects and denominations.
842such a person will not be deprived of his due reward.
843they cannot return to this world, nor can they repent to allah.
844the events of the last hour or of the resurrection.

surah 21 – al-anbiya
juz 17
316
104. the day when we will fold the heaven like the folding of a 
[written] sheet for the records.  as we began the first creation, 
we will repeat it.  [that is] a promise binding upon us.  indeed,
we will do it.845
105. and we have already written in the book [of psalms]846 after the
[previous] mention847 that the land [of paradise] is inherited by
my righteous servants.
106. indeed, in this [quran] is notification for a worshipping people.
107. and we have not sent you, [o muhammad], except as a mercy
to the worlds.
108. say, "it is only revealed to me that your god is but one god; 
so will you be muslims [in submission to him]?"
109. but if they turn away, then say, "i have announced to [all of] 
you equally.848  and i know not whether near or far is that 
which you are promised.
110. indeed, he knows what is declared of speech, and he knows 
what you conceal.
111. and i know not; perhaps it849 is a trial for you and enjoyment 
for a time."
112. [the prophet ()] has said, "my lord, judge [between us] in 
truth.  and our lord is the most merciful, the one whose help 
is sought against that which you describe."850
                                               
845more literally, "indeed, we are ever doers" of what we will.
846az-zabur can also mean "scriptures" in general.
847i.e., the torah.  the "mention" may also refer to the original inscription 
with allah, i.e., the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth).
848the prophet () made this message known to all people, not concealing 
any of it from anyone or preferring any group over another.
849the postponement of punishment.
850i.e., their lies and disbelief.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
317
surah al-hajj
851
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o mankind, fear your lord.  indeed, the convulsion of the [final]
hour is a terrible thing.
2. on the day you see it every nursing mother will be distracted 
from that [child] she was nursing, and every pregnant woman 
will abort her pregnancy, and you will see the people [appearing] 
intoxicated while they are not intoxicated; but the punishment 
of allah is severe.
3. and of the people is he who disputes about allah without 
knowledge and follows every rebellious devil.
4. it has been decreed for him [i.e., every devil] that whoever turns 
to him – he will misguide him and will lead him to the punishment
of the blaze.
5. o people, if you should be in doubt about the resurrection, then 
[consider that] indeed, we created you from dust, then from a 
sperm-drop, then from a clinging clot, and then from a lump of 
flesh, formed and unformed852 – that we may show you.853  and 
we settle in the wombs whom we will for a specified term, 
then we bring you out as a child, and then [we develop you] 
that you may reach your [time of] maturity.  and among you is 
he who is taken in [early] death, and among you is he who is 
returned to the most decrepit [old] age so that he knows, after 
[once having] knowledge, nothing.  and you see the earth barren,
but when we send down upon it rain, it quivers and swells and 
grows [something] of every beautiful kind.
6. that is because allah is the truth and because he gives life to 
the dead and because he is over all things competent
                                               
851al-hajj:  the pilgrimage.
852that which is incomplete.  this may include what is aborted at that stage.
853our power and creative ability.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
318
7.
and [that they may know] that the hour is coming – no doubt 
about it – and that allah will resurrect those in the graves.
8.
and of the people is he who disputes about allah without 
knowledge or guidance or an enlightening book [from him],
9.
twisting his neck [in arrogance] to mislead [people] from the 
way of allah.  for him in the world is disgrace, and we will 
make him taste on the day of resurrection the punishment of 
the burning fire [while it is said],
10.
"that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah 
is not ever unjust to [his] servants."
11.
and of the people is he who worships allah on an edge.854  if 
he is touched by good, he is reassured by it; but if he is struck 
by trial, he turns on his face [to the other direction].  he has lost
[this] world and the hereafter.  that is what is the manifest loss.
12.
he invokes instead of allah that which neither harms him nor 
benefits him.  that is what is the extreme error.
13.
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit – how 
wretched the protector and how wretched the associate.
14.
indeed, allah will admit those who believe and do righteous
deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow.  indeed, allah does
what he intends.
15.
whoever should think that allah will not support him [i.e., 
prophet muhammad ()] in this world and the hereafter – let 
him extend a rope to the ceiling, then cut off [his breath],855
and let him see:  will his effort remove that which enrages [him]?
16.
and thus have we sent it [i.e., the quran] down as verses of 
clear evidence and because allah guides whom he intends.
17.
indeed, those who have believed and those who were jews 
and the sabeans and the christians and the magians and those 
who associated with allah – allah will judge between them 
                                               
854at the edge of his religion, so to speak, i.e., with uncertainty, hypocrisy 
or heedlessness.
855i.e., strangle himself.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
319
on the day of resurrection.  indeed allah is, over all things, 
witness.
18.
do you not see [i.e., know] that to allah prostrates whoever is 
in the heavens and whoever is on the earth and the sun, the 
moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the moving creatures 
and many of the people?  but upon many the punishment has 
been justified.856  and he whom allah humiliates – for him 
there is no bestower of honor.  indeed, allah does what he 
wills.
19.
these857 are two adversaries who have disputed over their lord.  
but those who disbelieved will have cut out for them garments 
of fire.  poured upon their heads will be scalding water
20.
by which is melted that within their bellies and [their] skins.
21.
and for [striking] them are maces of iron.
22.
every time they want to get out of it [i.e., hellfire] from anguish,
they will be returned to it, and [it will be said], "taste the 
punishment of the burning fire!"
23.
indeed, allah will admit those who believe and do righteous 
deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow.  they will be adorned
therein with bracelets of gold and pearl, and their garments therein
will be silk.
24.
and they had been guided [in worldly life] to good speech, 
and they were guided to the path of the praiseworthy.
25.
indeed, those who have disbelieved and avert [people] from 
the way of allah and [from] al-masjid al-haram, which we 
made for the people – equal are the resident therein and one 
from outside – and [also] whoever intends [a deed] therein858
of deviation [in religion] or wrongdoing – we will make him 
taste of a painful punishment.
                                               
856and therefore decreed.
857i.e., the believers and the disbelievers.
858whether inside its boundaries or intending from afar to do evil therein.  
the haram is unique in that the mere intention of sin therein (whether or 
not it is actually carried out) is sufficient to bring punishment from allah.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
320
26.
and [mention, o muhammad], when we designated for ibrahim
the site of the house, [saying], "do not associate anything with 
me and purify my house for those who perform tawaf859 and 
those who stand [in prayer] and those who bow and prostrate.
27.
and proclaim to the people the hajj [pilgrimage]; they will 
come to you on foot and on every lean camel; they will come 
from every distant pass –
28.
that they may witness [i.e., attend] benefits for themselves 
and mention the name of allah on known [i.e., specific] days 
over what he has provided for them of [sacrificial] animals.860  
so eat of them and feed the miserable and poor.
29.
then let them end their untidiness and fulfill their vows and 
perform tawaf around the ancient house."
30.
that [has been commanded], and whoever honors the sacred 
ordinances of allah – it is best for him in the sight of his lord.  
and permitted to you are the grazing livestock, except what is 
recited to you.861  so avoid the uncleanliness of idols and avoid
false statement,
31.
inclining [only] to allah, not associating [anything] with him.  
and he who associates with allah – it is as though he had 
fallen from the sky and was snatched by the birds or the wind 
carried him down into a remote place.
32.
that [is so].  and whoever honors the symbols [i.e., rites] of 
allah – indeed, it is from the piety of hearts.
33.
for you therein [i.e., the animals marked for sacrifice] are benefits
for a specified term;862 then their place of sacrifice is at the 
ancient house.863
                                               
859see footnote to 2:125.
860al-anam:  camels, cattle, sheep and goats.
861see 5:3.
862i.e., they may be milked or ridden (in the case of camels) before the time 
of slaughter.
863i.e., within the boundaries of the haram, which includes mina.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
321
34.
and for all religion we have appointed a rite [of sacrifice]864
that they may mention the name of allah over what he has 
provided for them of [sacrificial] animals.  for your god is 
one god, so to him submit.  and, [o muhammad], give good 
tidings to the humble [before their lord]
35.
who, when allah is mentioned, their hearts are fearful, and [to]
the patient over what has afflicted them, and the establishers of 
prayer and those who spend from what we have provided them.
36.
and the camels and cattle we have appointed for you as among
the symbols [i.e., rites] of allah; for you therein is good.  so 
mention the name of allah upon them when lined up [for 
sacrifice]; and when they are [lifeless] on their sides, then eat 
from them and feed the needy [who does not seek aid] and the 
beggar.  thus have we subjected them to you that you may be 
grateful.
37.
their meat will not reach allah, nor will their blood, but what 
reaches him is piety from you.  thus have we subjected them 
to you that you may glorify allah for that [to] which he has 
guided you; and give good tidings to the doers of good.
38.
indeed, allah defends those who have believed.  indeed, allah
does not like everyone treacherous and ungrateful.
39.
permission [to fight] has been given to those who are being 
fought,865 because they were wronged.  and indeed, allah is 
competent to give them victory.
40.
[they are] those who have been evicted from their homes without
right – only because they say, "our lord is allah."  and were 
it not that allah checks the people, some by means of others, 
there would have been demolished monasteries, churches, 
synagogues, and mosques in which the name of allah is much 
mentioned [i.e., praised].  and allah will surely support those 
who support him [i.e., his cause].  indeed, allah is powerful 
and exalted in might.
                                               
864i.e., the right of sacrifice has always been a part of allah's revealed religion.
865referring here to the prophet's companions.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
322
41.
[and they are] those who, if we give them authority in the land,
establish prayer and give zakah and enjoin what is right and
forbid what is wrong.  and to allah belongs the outcome of [all] 
matters.
42.
and if they deny you, [o muhammad] – so, before them, did 
the people of noah and aad and thamud deny [their prophets],
43.
and the people of ibrahim and the people of lot
44.
and the inhabitants of madyan.  and moses was denied, so i 
prolonged enjoyment for the disbelievers; then i seized them, 
and how [terrible] was my reproach.
45.
and how many a city did we destroy while it was committing
wrong – so it is [now] fallen into ruin866 – and [how many] an 
abandoned well and [how many] a lofty palace.867
46.
so have they not traveled through the earth and have hearts by 
which to reason and ears by which to hear?  for indeed, it is 
not eyes that are blinded, but blinded are the hearts which are 
within the breasts.
47.
and they urge you to hasten the punishment.  but allah will 
never fail in his promise.  and indeed, a day with your lord 
is like a thousand years of those which you count.
48.
and for how many a city did i prolong enjoyment while it was 
committing wrong.  then i seized it, and to me is the [final] 
destination.
49.
say, "o people, i am only to you a clear warner."
50.
and those who have believed and done righteous deeds – for 
them is forgiveness and noble provision.
51.
but the ones who strove against our verses, [seeking] to cause 
failure868 – those are the companions of hellfire.
                                               
866literally, "fallen in upon its roofs," i.e., after the roofs of its buildings had 
caved in, the walls collapsed over them.
867i.e., how many wells have been left inoperative, and how many palaces 
have been emptied of their occupants in the past.
868i.e., trying to undermine their credibility and thereby defeat the prophet ().

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
323
52.
and we did not send before you any messenger or prophet 
except that when he spoke [or recited], satan threw into it 
[some misunderstanding].  but allah abolishes that which 
satan throws in; then allah makes precise his verses.869  and 
allah is knowing and wise.
53.
[that is] so he may make what satan throws in [i.e., asserts] a 
trial for those within whose hearts is disease870 and those hard 
of heart.  and indeed, the wrongdoers are in extreme dissension.
54.
and so those who were given knowledge may know that it is 
the truth from your lord and [therefore] believe in it, and their 
hearts humbly submit to it.  and indeed is allah the guide of 
those who have believed to a straight path.
55.
but those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt of it 
until the hour comes upon them unexpectedly or there comes 
to them the punishment of a barren day.871
56.
[all] sovereignty that day is for allah;872 he will judge 
between them.  so they who believed and did righteous deeds 
will be in the gardens of pleasure.
57.
and they who disbelieved and denied our signs – for those 
there will be a humiliating punishment.
58.
and those who emigrated for the cause of allah and then were 
killed or died – allah will surely provide for them a good
provision.  and indeed, it is allah who is the best of providers.
59.
he will surely cause them to enter an entrance with which they 
will be pleased, and indeed, allah is knowing and forbearing.
60.
that [is so].  and whoever responds [to injustice] with the 
equivalent of that with which he was harmed and then is 
tyrannized – allah will surely aid him.  indeed, allah is 
                                               
869clarifying those issues which were misunderstood to remove any doubt.
870see footnote to 2:10.
871one which will not be followed by night and therefore will not give birth 
to a new day, referring to the day of resurrection.
872none will compete with him for authority at that time.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
324
pardoning and forgiving.873
61.
that874 is because allah causes the night to enter the day and 
causes the day to enter the night and because allah is hearing 
and seeing.
62.
that is because allah is the truth, and that which they call 
upon other than him is falsehood, and because allah is the 
most high, the grand.
63.
do you not see that allah has sent down rain from the sky and the 
earth becomes green?  indeed, allah is subtle and acquainted.875
64.
to him belongs what is in the heavens and what is on the earth.  
and indeed, allah is the free of need, the praiseworthy.
65.
do you not see that allah has subjected to you whatever is on 
the earth and the ships which run through the sea by his 
command?  and he restrains the sky from falling upon the 
earth, unless by his permission.  indeed allah, to the people, 
is kind and merciful.
66.
and he is the one who gave you life; then he causes you to 
die and then will [again] give you life.  indeed, mankind is 
ungrateful.
67.
for every religion we have appointed rites which they perform.  
so, [o muhammad], let them [i.e., the disbelievers] not contend
with you over the matter but invite them to your lord.  indeed,
you are upon straight guidance.
68.
and if they dispute with you, then say, "allah is most knowing
of what you do.
69.
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection 
concerning that over which you used to differ."
70.
do you not know that allah knows what is in the heaven and 
                                               
873in spite of his ability to take vengeance.  the statement contains a suggestion
that the believers pardon as well.
874i.e., allah's capability to give assistance or victory to the oppressed.
875with his creation and with the needs of his creatures.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
325
earth?  indeed, that is in a record.876  indeed that, for allah, is 
easy.
71.
and they worship besides allah that for which he has not sent 
down authority and that of which they have no knowledge.  
and there will not be for the wrongdoers any helper.
72.
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
you recognize in the faces of those who disbelieve disapproval.  
they are almost on the verge of assaulting those who recite to 
them our verses.  say, "then shall i inform you of [what is] 
worse than that?877  [it is] the fire which allah has promised 
those who disbelieve, and wretched is the destination."
73.
o people, an example is presented, so listen to it.  indeed, those
you invoke besides allah will never create [as much as] a fly, 
even if they gathered together for it [i.e., that purpose].  and if 
the fly should steal from them a [tiny] thing, they could not 
recover it from him.  weak are the pursuer and pursued.878
74.
they have not appraised allah with true appraisal.879  indeed, 
allah is powerful and exalted in might.
75.
allah chooses from the angels messengers and from the people.  
indeed, allah is hearing and seeing.
76.
he knows what is [presently] before them and what will be 
after them.880  and to allah will be returned [all] matters.
77.
o you who have believed, bow and prostrate and worship 
your lord and do good – that you may succeed.
78.
and strive for allah with the striving due to him.  he has 
chosen you and has not placed upon you in the religion any 
                                               
876the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), which is with allah.
877i.e., worse than the rage you feel against those who recite allah's verses 
or worse than your threats against them.
878a comparison is made here to the worshipper of a false deity and that 
which he worships.
879they have not assessed him with the assessment due to him, meaning 
that they did not take into account his perfect attributes.
880see footnote to 2:255.

surah 22 – al-hajj
juz 17
326
difficulty.  [it is] the religion of your father, ibrahim.  he [i.e.,
allah] named you "muslims" before [in former scriptures] and 
in this [revelation] that the messenger may be a witness over 
you and you may be witnesses over the people.  so establish 
prayer and give zakah and hold fast to allah.  he is your protector;
and excellent is the protector, and excellent is the helper.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
327
surah al-muminun
881
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
certainly will the believers have succeeded:
2.
they who are during their prayer humbly submissive
3.
and they who turn away from ill speech
4.
and they who are observant of zakah
5.
and they who guard their private parts
6.
except from their wives or those their right hands possess,882
for indeed, they will not be blamed –
7.
but whoever seeks beyond that, then those are the transgressors –
8.
and they who are to their trusts and their promises attentive
9.
and they who carefully maintain their prayers –
10.
those are the inheritors
11.
who will inherit al-firdaus.883  they will abide therein eternally.
12.
and certainly did we create man from an extract of clay.
13.
then we placed him as a sperm-drop884 in a firm lodging [i.e., 
the womb].
14.
then we made the sperm-drop into a clinging clot, and we 
made the clot into a lump [of flesh], and we made [from] the 
lump, bones, and we covered the bones with flesh; then we 
developed him into another creation.  so blessed is allah, the 
best of creators.885
15.
then indeed, after that you are to die.
16.
then indeed you, on the day of resurrection, will be resurrected.
                                               
881al-muminun:  the believers.
882female slaves or captives under their ownership.
883the highest part of paradise.
884or "as a zygote."
885i.e., the most skillful and only true creator.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
328
17.
and we have created above you seven layered heavens, and 
never have we been of [our] creation unaware.
18.
and we have sent down rain from the sky in a measured 
amount and settled it in the earth.  and indeed, we are able to 
take it away.
19.
and we brought forth for you thereby gardens of palm trees 
and grapevines in which for you are abundant fruits and from 
which you eat.
20.
and [we brought forth] a tree issuing from mount sinai which
produces oil and food [i.e., olives] for those who eat.
21.
and indeed, for you in livestock is a lesson.  we give you drink
from that which is in their bellies, and for you in them are 
numerous benefits, and from them you eat.
22.
and upon them and on ships you are carried.
23.
and we had certainly sent noah to his people, and he said, "o 
my people, worship allah; you have no deity other than him; 
then will you not fear him?"
24.
but the eminent among those who disbelieved from his people 
said, "this is not but a man like yourselves who wishes to 
take precedence over you; and if allah had willed [to send a 
messenger], he would have sent down angels.  we have not 
heard of this among our forefathers.
25.
he is not but a man possessed with madness, so wait concerning
him for a time."
26.
[noah] said, "my lord, support me because they have denied 
me."
27.
so we inspired to him, "construct the ship under our observation
and our inspiration, and when our command comes and the oven
overflows,886 put into it [i.e., the ship] from each [creature] two
mates and your family, except those for whom the decree [of 
destruction] has proceeded.  and do not address me concerning
those who have wronged; indeed, they are to be drowned.
                                               
886see footnote to 11:40.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
329
28.
and when you have boarded the ship, you and those with you, 
then say, 'praise to allah who has saved us from the wrongdoing
people.'
29.
and say, 'my lord, let me land at a blessed landing place, and 
you are the best to accommodate [us].'"
30.
indeed in that are signs, and indeed, we are ever testing [our 
servants].
31.
then we produced after them a generation of others.
32.
and we sent among them a messenger887 from themselves, 
[saying], "worship allah; you have no deity other than him; 
then will you not fear him?"
33.
and the eminent among his people who disbelieved and denied
the meeting of the hereafter while we had given them luxury 
in the worldly life said, "this is not but a man like yourselves.  
he eats of that from which you eat and drinks of what you drink.
34.
and if you should obey a man like yourselves, indeed, you would
then be losers.
35.
does he promise you that when you have died and become 
dust and bones that you will be brought forth [once more]?
36.
how far, how far, is that which you are promised.888
37.
it [i.e., life] is not but our worldly life – we die and live, but 
we will not be resurrected.
38.
he is not but a man who has invented a lie about allah, and 
we will not believe him."
39.
he said, "my lord, support me because they have denied me."
40.
[allah] said, "after a little, they will surely become regretful."
41.
so the shriek889 seized them in truth,890 and we made them as 
[plant] stubble.  then away with the wrongdoing people.
                                               
887prophet hud, who was sent to the tribe of aad.
888i.e., how distant and improbable it is.
889see footnote to 11:67.
890i.e., by right or in justice.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
330
42.
then we produced after them other generations.
43.
no nation will precede its time [of termination], nor will they 
remain [thereafter].
44.
then we sent our messengers in succession.  every time there
came to a nation its messenger, they denied him, so we made 
them follow one another [to destruction], and we made them 
narrations.891  so away with a people who do not believe.
45.
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs 
and a clear authority
46.
to pharaoh and his establishment, but they were arrogant and 
were a haughty people.
47.
they said, "should we believe two men like ourselves while 
their people are for us in servitude?"
48.
so they denied them and were of those destroyed.
49.
and we certainly gave moses the scripture that perhaps they892
would be guided.
50.
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign and 
sheltered them within a high ground having level [areas] and 
flowing water.
51.
[allah said], "o messengers, eat from the good foods and work
righteousness.  indeed i, of what you do, am knowing.
52.
and indeed this, your religion, is one religion,893 and i am 
your lord, so fear me."
53.
but they [i.e., the people] divided their religion among them into 
portions [i.e., sects] – each faction, in what it has,894 rejoicing.
54.
so leave them in their confusion for a time.
55.
do they think that what we extend to them of wealth and children
                                               
891i.e., history or lessons for mankind.
892the children of israel.
893see footnote to 21:92.
894of beliefs, opinions, customs, etc.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
331
56.
is [because] we hasten for them good things?  rather, they do 
not perceive.895
57.
indeed, they who are apprehensive from fear of their lord
58.
and they who believe in the signs of their lord
59.
and they who do not associate anything with their lord
60.
and they who give what they give while their hearts are 
fearful896 because they will be returning to their lord –
61.
it is those who hasten to good deeds, and they outstrip [others] 
therein.
62.
and we charge no soul except [with that within] its capacity, 
and with us is a record which speaks with truth; and they will 
not be wronged.
63.
but their hearts are covered with confusion over this, and they 
have [evil] deeds besides that [i.e., disbelief] which they are 
doing,
64.
until when we seize their affluent ones with punishment,897 at 
once they are crying [to allah] for help.
65.
do not cry out today.  indeed, by us you will not be helped.
66.
my verses had already been recited to you, but you were turning
back on your heels
67.
in arrogance regarding it,898 conversing by night, speaking evil.
68.
then have they not reflected over the word [i.e., the quran], 
or has there come to them that which had not come to their 
forefathers?
69.
or did they not know their messenger, so they are toward him 
disacknowledging?
70.
or do they say, "in him is madness"?  rather, he brought them 
the truth, but most of them, to the truth, are averse.
                                               
895that the good things given to them in this world are but a trial for them.
896lest their deeds not be acceptable.
897in worldly life, before the punishment of the hereafter.  although general,
the description includes specifically the punishment of the quraysh by famine.
898the revelation.  or "him," i.e., the prophet ().

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
332
71.
but if the truth [i.e., allah] had followed their inclinations, 
the heavens and the earth and whoever is in them would have 
been ruined.  rather, we have brought them their message,899
but they, from their message, are turning away.
72.
or do you, [o muhammad], ask them for payment?  but the 
reward of your lord is best, and he is the best of providers.
73.
and indeed, you invite them to a straight path.
74.
but indeed, those who do not believe in the hereafter are 
deviating from the path.
75.
and even if we gave them mercy and removed what was upon
them of affliction, they would persist in their transgression, 
wandering blindly.
76.
and we had gripped them with suffering [as a warning], but
they did not yield to their lord, nor did they humbly supplicate,
[and will continue thus]
77.
until when we have opened before them a door of severe 
punishment, immediately they will be therein in despair.
78.
and it is he who produced for you hearing and vision and 
hearts [i.e., intellect]; little are you grateful.
79.
and it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth, and 
to him you will be gathered.
80.
and it is he who gives life and causes death, and his is the
alternation of the night and the day.  then will you not reason?
81.
rather,900 they say like what the former peoples said.
82.
they said, "when we have died and become dust and bones, 
are we indeed to be resurrected?
83.
we have been promised this, we and our forefathers, before; 
this is not but legends of the former peoples."
84.
say, [o muhammad], "to whom belongs the earth and whoever
is in it, if you should know?"
                                               
899or "reminder."
900instead of understanding or reasoning.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
333
85. they will say, "to allah."  say, "then will you not remember?"
86. say, "who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the great 
throne?"
87. they will say, "[they belong] to allah."  say, "then will you 
not fear him?"
88. say, "in whose hand is the realm of all things – and he protects 
while none can protect against him – if you should know?"
89. they will say, "[all belongs] to allah."  say, "then how are 
you deluded?"
90. rather, we have brought them the truth, and indeed they are liars.
91. allah has not taken any son, nor has there ever been with him 
any deity.  [if there had been], then each deity would have 
taken what it created, and some of them would have sought to 
overcome others.  exalted is allah above what they describe 
[concerning him].
92. [he is] knower of the unseen and the witnessed, so high is he 
above what they associate [with him].
93. say, [o muhammad], "my lord, if you should show me that 
which they are promised,
94. my lord, then do not place me among the wrongdoing people."
95. and indeed, we are able to show you what we have promised
them.
96. repel, by [means of] what is best, [their] evil.  we are most 
knowing of what they describe.
97. and say, "my lord, i seek refuge in you from the incitements 
of the devils,
98. and i seek refuge in you, my lord, lest they be present with me."
99. [for such is the state of the disbelievers] until, when death 
comes to one of them, he says, "my lord, send me back
100. that i might do righteousness in that which i left behind."901  
                                               
901or "in that which i neglected."

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
334
no! it is only a word he is saying; and behind them is a barrier
until the day they are resurrected.
101. so when the horn is blown, no relationship will there be among
them that day, nor will they ask about one another.
102. and those whose scales are heavy [with good deeds] – it is 
they who are the successful.
103. but those whose scales are light – those are the ones who have 
lost their souls, [being] in hell, abiding eternally.
104. the fire will sear their faces, and they therein will have taut 
smiles.902
105. [it will be said], "were not my verses recited to you and you 
used to deny them?"
106. they will say, "our lord, our wretchedness overcame us, and 
we were a people astray.
107. our lord, remove us from it, and if we were to return [to evil],
we would indeed be wrongdoers."
108. he will say, "remain despised therein and do not speak to me.
109. indeed, there was a party of my servants who said, 'our lord, 
we have believed, so forgive us and have mercy upon us, and 
you are the best of the merciful.'
110. but you took them in mockery to the point that they made you 
forget my remembrance, and you used to laugh at them.
111. indeed, i have rewarded them this day for their patient 
endurance – that they are the attainers [of success]."
112. [allah] will say, "how long did you remain on earth in number 
of years?"
113. they will say, "we remained a day or part of a day; ask those 
who enumerate."
114. he will say, "you stayed not but a little – if only you had known.
                                               
902their lips having been contracted by scorching until the teeth are exposed.

surah 23 – al-muminun
juz 18
335
115. then did you think that we created you uselessly and that to 
us you would not be returned?"
116. so exalted is allah, the sovereign, the truth; there is no deity 
except him, lord of the noble throne.
117. and whoever invokes besides allah another deity for which he 
has no proof – then his account is only with his lord.  indeed,
the disbelievers will not succeed.
118. and, [o muhammad], say, "my lord, forgive and have mercy,
and you are the best of the merciful."

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
336
surah an-nur
903
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. [this is] a surah which we have sent down and made [that within 
it] obligatory and revealed therein verses of clear evidence that
you might remember.
2. the [unmarried] woman or [unmarried] man found guilty of sexual
intercourse904 – lash each one of them with a hundred lashes,905
and do not be taken by pity for them in the religion [i.e., law] of 
allah,906 if you should believe in allah and the last day.  and 
let a group of the believers witness their punishment.
3. the fornicator does not marry except a [female] fornicator or 
polytheist, and none marries her except a fornicator907 or a 
polytheist, and that [i.e., marriage to such persons] has been made
unlawful to the believers.
4. and those who accuse chaste women and then do not produce 
four witnesses – lash them with eighty lashes and do not accept 
from them testimony ever after.  and those are the defiantly 
disobedient,
5. except for those who repent thereafter and reform, for indeed, 
allah is forgiving and merciful.
6. and those who accuse their wives [of adultery] and have no 
witnesses except themselves – then the witness of one of them908
                                               
903an-nur:  light.
904either by voluntary confession of the offender or the testimony of four 
male witnesses to having actually seen the act take place.  otherwise, 
there can be no conviction.
905the ruling in this verse is applicable to unmarried fornicators.  execution 
by stoning is confirmed in the sunnah for convicted adulterers.
906i.e., do not let sympathy for a guilty person move you to alter anything 
ordained by allah, for in his law is protection of society as a whole.
907included in this ruling is the adulterer as well.  such persons cannot be 
married to believers unless they have repented and reformed.
908the husbands who have been betrayed.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
337
[shall be] four testimonies [swearing] by allah that indeed, he 
is of the truthful.
7.
and the fifth [oath will be] that the curse of allah be upon 
him if he should be among the liars.
8.
but it will prevent punishment from her if she gives four 
testimonies [swearing] by allah that indeed, he is of the liars.
9.
and the fifth [oath will be] that the wrath of allah be upon her 
if he was of the truthful.
10.
and if not for the favor of allah upon you and his mercy...909
and because allah is accepting of repentance and wise.
11.
indeed, those who came with falsehood910 are a group among you.  
do not think it bad for you; rather, it is good for you.  for every 
person among them is what [punishment] he has earned from 
the sin, and he who took upon himself the greater portion 
thereof911 – for him is a great punishment [i.e., hellfire].
12.
why, when you heard it, did not the believing men and believing
women think good of themselves [i.e., one another] and say, 
"this is an obvious falsehood"?
13.
why did they [who slandered] not produce for it four witnesses?  
and when they do not produce the witnesses, then it is they, 
in the sight of allah, who are the liars.
14.
and if it had not been for the favor of allah upon you and his
mercy in this world and the hereafter, you would have been 
touched for that [lie] in which you were involved by a great 
punishment
15.
when you received it with your tongues912 and said with your 
                                               
909the phrase omitted is estimated to be "...you would have surely been 
punished, destroyed or scandalized," or "...you would have suffered many 
difficult situations."
910referring to the incident when the prophet's wife ôaishah was falsely 
accused by the hypocrites.
911i.e., abdullah bin ubayy, leader of the hypocrites.
912rather than your ears, i.e., not thinking about what you had heard but 
hastening to repeat it carelessly.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
338
mouths that of which you had no knowledge and thought it 
was insignificant while it was, in the sight of allah, tremendous.
16.
and why, when you heard it, did you not say, "it is not for us to 
speak of this.  exalted are you, [o allah]; this is a great slander"?
17.
allah warns you against returning to the likes of this [conduct],
ever, if you should be believers.
18.
and allah makes clear to you the verses [i.e., his rulings], and
allah is knowing and wise.
19.
indeed, those who like that immorality913 should be spread [or 
publicized] among those who have believed will have a painful
punishment in this world and the hereafter.  and allah knows914
and you do not know.
20.
and if it had not been for the favor of allah upon you and his 
mercy...915 and because allah is kind and merciful.
21.
o you who have believed, do not follow the footsteps of satan.  
and whoever follows the footsteps of satan – indeed, he enjoins
immorality and wrongdoing.  and if not for the favor of allah
upon you and his mercy, not one of you would have been pure,
ever, but allah purifies whom he wills, and allah is hearing 
and knowing.
22.
and let not those of virtue among you and wealth swear not to 
give [aid] to their relatives and the needy and the emigrants 
for the cause of allah, and let them pardon and overlook.  
would you not like that allah should forgive you?  and allah 
is forgiving and merciful.
23.
indeed, those who [falsely] accuse chaste, unaware and believing
women are cursed in this world and the hereafter; and they 
will have a great punishment
24.
on a day when their tongues, their hands and their feet will 
bear witness against them as to what they used to do.
                                               
913specifically, unlawful sexual relations.
914the hidden aspects of all things:  what is beneficial and what is harmful.
915see footnote to verse 10.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
339
25.
that day, allah will pay them in full their true [i.e., deserved] 
recompense, and they will know that it is allah who is the 
manifest truth [i.e., perfect in justice].
26.
evil words are for evil men, and evil men are [subjected] to 
evil words.  and good words are for good men, and good men 
are [an object] of good words.916  those [good people] are 
declared innocent of what they [i.e., slanderers] say.  for them 
is forgiveness and noble provision.
27.
o you who have believed, do not enter houses other than your 
own houses until you ascertain welcome and greet917 their 
inhabitants.  that is best for you; perhaps you will be reminded
[i.e., advised].
28.
and if you do not find anyone therein, do not enter them until 
permission has been given you.  and if it is said to you, "go 
back,"918 then go back; it is purer for you.  and allah is knowing 
of what you do.
29.
there is no blame upon you for entering houses not inhabited 
in which there is convenience919 for you.  and allah knows 
what you reveal and what you conceal.
30.
tell the believing men to reduce [some] of their vision920 and 
guard their private parts.921  that is purer for them.  indeed, 
allah is acquainted with what they do.
31.
and tell the believing women to reduce [some] of their vision922
and guard their private parts and not expose their adornment923
                                               
916another accepted interpretation is "evil women are for evil men, and evil 
men are for evil women.  and good women are for good men, and good 
men are for good women."
917by the words "as-salamu alaykum" ("peace be upon you").
918or a similar expression showing that the occupants are not prepared to 
receive visitors (which should be respected).
919some benefit such as rest, shelter, commodities, one's personal belongings, etc.
920looking only at what is lawful and averting their eyes from what is unlawful.
921from being seen and from unlawful acts.
922looking only at what is lawful and averting their eyes from what is unlawful.
923both natural beauty, such as hair or body shape, and that with which a 
woman beautifies herself of clothing, jewelry, etc.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
340
except that which [necessarily] appears thereof924 and to wrap 
[a portion of] their headcovers over their chests and not expose
their adornment [i.e., beauty] except to their husbands, their 
fathers, their husbands' fathers, their sons, their husbands' sons,
their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their 
women, that which their right hands possess [i.e., slaves], or 
those male attendants having no physical desire,925 or children 
who are not yet aware of the private aspects of women.  and 
let them not stamp their feet to make known what they 
conceal of their adornment.  and turn to allah in repentance, 
all of you, o believers, that you might succeed.
32.
and marry the unmarried among you and the righteous among
your male slaves and female slaves.  if they should be poor, allah 
will enrich them from his bounty, and allah is all-encompassing
and knowing.
33.
but let them who find not [the means for] marriage abstain 
[from sexual relations] until allah enriches them from his bounty.  
and those who seek a contract [for eventual emancipation] 
from among whom your right hands possess926 – then make a 
contract with them if you know there is within them goodness 
and give them from the wealth of allah which he has given you.  
and do not compel your slave girls to prostitution, if they desire
chastity, to seek [thereby] the temporary interests of worldly 
life.  and if someone should compel them, then indeed, allah 
is [to them], after their compulsion, forgiving and merciful.
34.
and we have certainly sent down to you distinct verses927 and 
examples from those who passed on before you and an 
admonition for those who fear allah.
                                               
924i.e., the outer garments or whatever might appear out of necessity, such as 
a part of the face or the hands.
925referring to an abnormal condition in which a man is devoid of sexual feeling.
926i.e., those slaves who desire to purchase their freedom from their owners 
for a price agreed upon by both.
927i.e., rulings and ordinances, in particular those in this surah.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
341
35.
allah is the light928 of the heavens and the earth.  the example
of his light929 is like a niche within which is a lamp;930 the 
lamp is within glass, the glass as if it were a pearly [white] star 
lit from [the oil of] a blessed olive tree, neither of the east nor 
of the west, whose oil would almost glow even if untouched 
by fire.  light upon light.  allah guides to his light whom he 
wills.  and allah presents examples for the people, and allah 
is knowing of all things.
36.
[such niches are] in houses [i.e., mosques] which allah has 
ordered to be raised and that his name be mentioned [i.e., 
praised] therein; exalting him within them in the morning and 
the evenings931
37.
[are] men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the 
remembrance of allah and performance of prayer and giving 
of zakah.  they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will 
[fearfully] turn about –
38.
that allah may reward them [according to] the best of what 
they did and increase them from his bounty.  and allah gives 
provision to whom he wills without account [i.e., limit].
39.
but those who disbelieved – their deeds are like a mirage in a 
lowland which a thirsty one thinks is water until, when he 
comes to it, he finds it is nothing but finds allah before him, 
and he will pay him in full his due; and allah is swift in account.
40.
or [they are] like darknesses within an unfathomable sea which
is covered by waves, upon which are waves, over which are 
clouds – darknesses, some of them upon others.  when one 
puts out his hand [therein], he can hardly see it.  and he to 
whom allah has not granted light – for him there is no light.
41.
do you not see that allah is exalted by whomever is within 
                                               
928i.e., the source and bestower of light and enlightenment.
929his guidance in the heart of a believing servant.
930literally, "a burning wick," which is the essence of a lamp.
931the term used here can refer to either afternoon or evening.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
342
the heavens and the earth and [by] the birds with wings spread 
[in flight]?  each [of them] has known his [means of] prayer 
and exalting [him], and allah is knowing of what they do.
42.
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth,
and to allah is the destination.
43.
do you not see that allah drives clouds?  then he brings 
them together; then he makes them into a mass, and you see 
the rain emerge from within it.  and he sends down from the 
sky, mountains [of clouds] within which is hail, and he strikes 
with it whom he wills and averts it from whom he wills.  the 
flash of its lightening almost takes away the eyesight.
44.
allah alternates the night and the day.  indeed in that is a lesson
for those who have vision.
45.
allah has created every [living] creature from water.  and of 
them are those that move on their bellies, and of them are those 
that walk on two legs, and of them are those that walk on four.  
allah creates what he wills.  indeed, allah is over all things 
competent.
46.
we have certainly sent down distinct verses.  and allah guides
whom he wills to a straight path.
47.
but they [i.e., the hypocrites] say, "we have believed in allah 
and in the messenger, and we obey"; then a party of them turns
away after that.  and those are not believers.
48.
and when they are called to [the words of] allah and his 
messenger to judge between them, at once a party of them 
turns aside [in refusal].
49.
but if the right is theirs, they come to him in prompt obedience.
50.
is there disease in their hearts?  or have they doubted?  or do 
they fear that allah will be unjust to them, or his messenger?  
rather, it is they who are the wrongdoers [i.e., the unjust].
51.
the only statement of the [true] believers when they are called 
to allah and his messenger to judge between them is that they
say, "we hear and we obey."  and those are the successful.

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
343
52.
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger and fears allah 
and is conscious of him – it is those who are the attainers.
53.
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if you 
ordered them, they would go forth [in allah's cause].  say, 
"do not swear.  [such] obedience is known.932  indeed, allah 
is acquainted with that which you do."
54.
say, "obey allah and obey the messenger; but if you turn 
away – then upon him is only that [duty] with which he has 
been charged, and upon you is that with which you have been 
charged.  and if you obey him, you will be [rightly] guided.  
and there is not upon the messenger except the [responsibility 
for] clear notification."
55.
allah has promised those who have believed among you and done
righteous deeds that he will surely grant them succession [to 
authority] upon the earth just as he granted it to those before 
them and that he will surely establish for them [therein] their 
religion which he has preferred for them and that he will 
surely substitute for them, after their fear, security, [for] they 
worship me, not associating anything with me.  but whoever 
disbelieves933 after that – then those are the defiantly disobedient.
56.
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger –
that you may receive mercy.
57.
never think that the disbelievers are causing failure [to allah] 
upon the earth.  their refuge will be the fire – and how wretched
the destination.
58.
o you who have believed, let those whom your right hands 
possess and those who have not [yet] reached puberty among 
you ask permission of you [before entering] at three times:  
before the dawn prayer and when you put aside your clothing 
[for rest] at noon and after the night prayer.  [these are] three 
times of privacy934 for you.  there is no blame upon you nor upon
                                               
932i.e., the hypocrites' pretense of obedience is known to be a lie.
933i.e., denies the favor of allah or does not live by his ordinance.
934literally, "exposure" or "being uncovered."

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
344
them beyond these [periods], for they continually circulate among 
you – some of you, among others.  thus does allah make clear
to you the verses [i.e., his ordinances]; and allah is knowing 
and wise.
59.
and when the children among you reach puberty, let them ask 
permission [at all times] as those before them have done.  
thus does allah make clear to you his verses; and allah is 
knowing and wise.
60.
and women of post-menstrual age who have no desire for 
marriage – there is no blame upon them for putting aside their 
outer garments [but] not displaying adornment.  but to modestly
refrain [from that] is better for them.  and allah is hearing 
and knowing.
61.
there is not upon the blind [any] constraint nor upon the lame 
constraint nor upon the ill constraint nor upon yourselves when
you eat from your [own] houses or the houses of your fathers 
or the houses of your mothers or the houses of your brothers 
or the houses of your sisters or the houses of your father's 
brothers or the houses of your father's sisters or the houses of 
your mother's brothers or the houses of your mother's sisters 
or [from houses] whose keys you possess or [from the house] 
of your friend.  there is no blame upon you whether you eat 
together or separately.  but when you enter houses, give greetings
of peace935 upon each other – a greeting from allah, blessed 
and good.  thus does allah make clear to you the verses [of 
ordinance] that you may understand.
62.
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his 
messenger and, when they are [meeting] with him for a matter 
of common interest, do not depart until they have asked his 
permission.  indeed, those who ask your permission, [o 
muhammad] – those are the ones who believe in allah and 
his messenger.  so when they ask your permission for 
something of their affairs, then give permission to whom you 
                                               
935saying, "as-salamu alaykum" ("peace be upon you").

surah 24 – an-nur
juz 18
345
will among them and ask forgiveness for them of allah.  indeed,
allah is forgiving and merciful.
63.
do not make [your] calling of the messenger among yourselves
as the call of one of you to another.  already allah knows 
those of you who slip away, concealed by others.  so let those 
beware who dissent from his [i.e., the prophet's] order,936 lest 
fitnah937 strike them or a painful punishment.
64.
unquestionably, to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens 
and earth.  already he knows that upon which you [stand]938
and [knows] the day939 when they will be returned to him and 
he will inform them of what they have done.  and allah is 
knowing of all things.
                                               
936meaning also his way or his sunnah.
937trials, affliction, dissension, strife, etc.
938i.e., your position – the basis for your actions (whether sincere faith or 
hypocrisy) and the condition of your souls.
939the meaning can also be rendered "...and [let them beware of] the day..."

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 18
346
surah al-furqan
940
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant 
that he may be to the worlds a warner –
2. he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth 
and who has not taken a son and has not had a partner in 
dominion and has created each thing and determined it with 
[precise] determination.
3. but they have taken besides him gods which create nothing, 
while they are created, and possess not for themselves any harm 
or benefit and possess not [power to cause] death or life or 
resurrection.
4. and those who disbelieve say, "this [quran] is not except a 
falsehood he invented, and another people assisted him in it."  
but they have committed an injustice and a lie.
5. and they say, "legends of the former peoples which he has written
down, and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon."
6. say, [o muhammad], "it has been revealed by he who knows 
[every] secret within the heavens and the earth.  indeed, he is 
ever forgiving and merciful."
7. and they say, "what is this messenger that eats food and walks 
in the markets?  why was there not sent down to him an angel 
so he would be with him a warner?
8. or [why is not] a treasure presented to him [from heaven], or does 
he [not] have a garden from which he eats?"  and the wrongdoers
say, "you follow not but a man affected by magic."
9. look how they strike for you comparisons;941 but they have strayed,
so they cannot [find] a way.
                                               
940al-furqan:  the criterion, which is another name for the quran and means 
"that which distinguishes truth from falsehood and right from wrong."
941from their own imaginations in order to deny and discredit you.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 18
347
10.
blessed is he who, if he willed, could have made for you 
[something] better than that – gardens beneath which rivers 
flow – and could make for you palaces.
11.
but they have denied the hour, and we have prepared for those
who deny the hour a blaze.
12.
when it [i.e., the hellfire] sees them from a distant place, they 
will hear its fury and roaring.
13.
and when they are thrown into a narrow place therein bound 
in chains, they will cry out thereupon for destruction.
14.
[they will be told], "do not cry this day for one destruction 
but cry for much destruction."
15.
say, "is that better or the garden of eternity which is promised
to the righteous?  it will be for them a reward and destination.
16.
for them therein is whatever they wish, [while] abiding eternally.  
it is ever upon your lord a promise [worthy to be] requested.942
17.
and [mention] the day he will gather them and that which they 
worship besides allah and will say, "did you mislead these, 
my servants, or did they [themselves] stray from the way?"
18.
they will say, "exalted are you!  it was not for us to take 
besides you any allies [i.e., protectors].  but you provided 
comforts for them and their fathers until they forgot the message
and became a people ruined."
19.
so they will deny you, [disbelievers], in what you say,943 and 
you cannot avert [punishment] or [find] help.  and whoever 
commits injustice944 among you – we will make him taste a 
great punishment.
20.
and we did not send before you, [o muhammad], any of the 
messengers except that they ate food and walked in the markets.  
and we have made some of you [people] as trial for others –
will you have patience?  and ever is your lord, seeing.
                                               
942or "...a promise requested [for them by the angels]."
943at the time of judgement the false objects of worship will betray their 
worshippers and deny them.
944specifically, association of others with allah.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
348
21.
and those who do not expect the meeting with us say, "why 
were not angels sent down to us, or [why] do we [not] see our 
lord?"  they have certainly become arrogant within themselves945
and [become] insolent with great insolence.
22.
the day they see the angels946 – no good tidings will there 
be that day for the criminals, and [the angels] will say, 
"prevented and inaccessible."947
23.
and we will approach [i.e., regard]948 what they have done of 
deeds and make them as dust dispersed.
24.
the companions of paradise, that day, are [in] a better settlement
and better resting place.
25.
and [mention] the day when the heaven will split open with 
[emerging] clouds,949 and the angels will be sent down in 
successive descent.
26.
true sovereignty, that day, is for the most merciful.  and it 
will be upon the disbelievers a difficult day.
27.
and the day the wrongdoer will bite on his hands [in regret] 
he will say, "oh, i wish i had taken with the messenger a way.950
28.
oh, woe to me!  i wish i had not taken that one951 as a friend.
29.
he led me away from the remembrance952 after it had come to 
me.  and ever is satan, to man, a deserter."953
30.
and the messenger has said, "o my lord, indeed my people 
have taken this quran as [a thing] abandoned."954
                                               
945additional meanings are "among themselves" and "over [the matter of] 
themselves."
946i.e., at the time of death.
947referring to any good tidings.
948on the day of judgement.
949within which are the angels.
950i.e., followed the prophet () on a path of guidance.
951the person who misguided him.
952i.e., the quran or the remembrance of allah.
953forsaking him once he has led him into evil.
954i.e., avoiding it, not listening to or understanding it, not living by it, or 
preferring something else to it.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
349
31.
and thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from 
among the criminals.  but sufficient is your lord as a guide and
a helper.
32.
and those who disbelieve say, "why was the quran not revealed
to him all at once?"  thus [it is] that we may strengthen thereby
your heart.  and we have spaced it distinctly.955
33.
and they do not come to you with an example [i.e., argument] 
except that we bring you the truth and the best explanation.
34.
the ones who are gathered on their faces to hell – those are 
the worst in position and farthest astray in [their] way.
35.
and we had certainly given moses the scripture and appointed
with him his brother aaron as an assistant.
36.
and we said, "go both of you to the people who have denied 
our signs."  then we destroyed them with [complete] destruction.
37.
and the people of noah – when they denied the messengers,956
we drowned them, and we made them for mankind a sign.  
and we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment.
38.
and [we destroyed] aad and thamud and the companions of 
the well957 and many generations between them.
39.
and for each we presented examples [as warnings], and each 
we destroyed with [total] destruction.
40.
and they have already come upon the town which was showered
with a rain of evil [i.e., stones].  so have they not seen it?  but
they are not expecting resurrection.958
41.
and when they see you, [o muhammad], they take you not 
except in ridicule, [saying], "is this the one whom allah has 
sent as a messenger?
                                               
955also, "recited it with distinct recitation."
956their denial of noah was as if they had denied all those who brought the 
same message from allah.
957said to be a people who denied prophet shuayb or possibly those 
mentioned in surah ya seen, 36:13-29.
958so they do not benefit from lessons of the past.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
350
42.
he almost would have misled us from our gods had we not been 
steadfast in [worship of] them."  but they are going to know, 
when they see the punishment, who is farthest astray in [his] way.
43.
have you seen the one who takes as his god his own desire?  
then would you be responsible for him?
44.
or do you think that most of them hear or reason?  they are not 
except like livestock.959  rather, they are [even] more astray in
[their] way.
45.
have you not considered your lord – how he extends the 
shadow, and if he willed, he could have made it stationary?  
then we made the sun for it an indication.960
46.
then we hold it in hand for a brief grasp.961
47.
and it is he who has made the night for you as clothing962 and 
sleep [a means for] rest and has made the day a resurrection.963
48.
and it is he who sends the winds as good tidings before his 
mercy [i.e., rainfall], and we send down from the sky pure water
49.
that we may bring to life thereby a dead land and give it as 
drink to those we created of numerous livestock and men.
50.
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they 
might be reminded,964 but most of the people refuse except 
disbelief.
51.
and if we had willed, we could have sent into every city a 
warner.965
52.
so do not obey the disbelievers, and strive against them with 
it [i.e., the quran] a great striving.
                                               
959i.e., cattle or sheep, that follow without question wherever they are led.
960i.e., showing the existence of a shadow or making it apparent by contrast.
961i.e., when the sun is overhead at noon.
962covering and concealing you in its darkness.
963for renewal of life and activity.
964of allah's ability to bring the dead to life.
965however, allah willed that prophet muhammad () be sent as the final 
messenger for all peoples of the earth until the day of resurrection.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
351
53.
and it is he who has released [simultaneously] the two seas 
[i.e., bodies of water], one fresh and sweet and one salty and bitter,
and he placed between them a barrier and prohibiting partition.
54.
and it is he who has created from water [i.e., semen] a human 
being and made him [a relative by] lineage and marriage.  
and ever is your lord competent [concerning creation].
55.
but they worship rather than allah that which does not benefit
them or harm them, and the disbeliever is ever, against his lord, 
an assistant [to satan].
56.
and we have not sent you, [o muhammad], except as a bringer
of good tidings and a warner.
57.
say, "i do not ask of you for it any payment – only that whoever
wills might take to his lord a way."
58.
and rely upon the ever-living who does not die, and exalt 
[allah] with his praise.  and sufficient is he to be, with the 
sins of his servants, acquainted –
59.
he who created the heavens and the earth and what is between 
them in six days and then established himself above the 
throne966 – the most merciful, so ask about him one well 
informed [i.e., the prophet ()].
60.
and when it is said to them, "prostrate to the most merciful," 
they say, "and what is the most merciful?  should we prostrate
to that which you order us?"  and it increases them in aversion.
61.
blessed is he who has placed in the sky great stars and placed 
therein a [burning] lamp and luminous moon.
62.
and it is he who has made the night and the day in succession 
for whoever desires to remember or desires gratitude.
63.
and the servants of the most merciful are those who walk 
upon the earth easily,967 and when the ignorant address them 
[harshly], they say [words of] peace,968
                                               
966see footnote to 2:19.
967i.e., gently, with dignity but without arrogance.
968or "safety," i.e., words free from fault or evil.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
352
64.
and those who spend [part of] the night to their lord prostrating
and standing [in prayer]
65.
and those who say, "our lord, avert from us the punishment 
of hell.  indeed, its punishment is ever adhering;
66.
indeed, it is evil as a settlement and residence."
67.
and [they are] those who, when they spend, do so not excessively
or sparingly but are ever, between that, [justly] moderate
68.
and those who do not invoke with allah another deity or kill 
the soul which allah has forbidden [to be killed], except by right,
and do not commit unlawful sexual intercourse.  and whoever 
should do that will meet a penalty.
69.
multiplied for him is the punishment on the day of resurrection,
and he will abide therein humiliated –
70.
except for those who repent, believe and do righteous work.  
for them allah will replace their evil deeds with good.  and 
ever is allah forgiving and merciful.
71.
and he who repents and does righteousness does indeed turn 
to allah with [accepted] repentance.
72.
and [they are] those who do not testify to falsehood, and 
when they pass near ill speech, they pass by with dignity.
73.
and those who, when reminded of the verses of their lord, do 
not fall upon them deaf and blind.
74.
and those who say, "our lord, grant us from among our wives
and offspring comfort to our eyes969 and make us a leader [i.e., 
example] for the righteous."
75.
those will be awarded the chamber970 for what they patiently 
endured, and they will be received therein with greetings and 
[words of] peace,
76.
abiding eternally therein.  good is the settlement and residence.
                                               
969i.e., a source of happiness due to their righteousness.
970the most elevated portion of paradise.

surah 25 – al-furqan
juz 19
353
77.
say, "what would my lord care for you if not for your 
supplication?"971  for you [disbelievers] have denied, so it 
[i.e., your denial] is going to be adherent.972
                                               
971i.e., faith and worship.  an alternative meaning is "what would my lord 
do with you..."
972it will remain with them, causing punishment to be required and imperative
upon them.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
354
surah ash-shuara
973
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
$œ, seen, meem.974
2.
these are the verses of the clear book.
3.
perhaps, [o muhammad], you would kill yourself with grief 
that they will not be believers.
4.
if we willed, we could send down to them from the sky a 
sign for which their necks would remain humbled.975
5.
and no mention [i.e., revelation] comes to them anew from 
the most merciful except that they turn away from it.
6.
for they have already denied, but there will come to them the 
news of that which they used to ridicule.
7.
did they not look at the earth – how much we have produced 
therein from every noble kind?
8.
indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
9.
and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
10.
and [mention] when your lord called moses, [saying], "go to 
the wrongdoing people –
11.
the people of pharaoh.  will they not fear allah?"
12.
he said, "my lord, indeed i fear that they will deny me
13.
and that my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent,
so send for aaron.
14.
and they have upon me a [claim due to] sin, so i fear that they 
will kill me."
15.
[allah] said, "no.  go both of you with our signs; indeed, we 
are with you, listening.
                                               
973ash-shuara:  the poets.
974see footnote to 2:1.
975i.e., they would be compelled to believe.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
355
16.
go to pharaoh and say, 'we are the messengers976 of the lord 
of the worlds,
17.
[commanded to say], "send with us the children of israel."'"
18.
[pharaoh] said, "did we not raise you among us as a child, 
and you remained among us for years of your life?
19.
and [then] you did your deed which you did,977 and you were 
of the ungrateful."
20.
[moses] said, "i did it, then, while i was of those astray [i.e., 
ignorant].
21.
so i fled from you when i feared you.  then my lord granted 
me judgement [i.e., wisdom and prophethood] and appointed 
me [as one] of the messengers.
22.
and is this a favor of which you remind me – that you have 
enslaved the children of israel?"
23.
said pharaoh, "and what is the lord of the worlds?"
24.
[moses] said, "the lord of the heavens and earth and that 
between them, if you should be convinced."
25.
[pharaoh] said to those around him, "do you not hear?"
26.
[moses] said, "your lord and the lord of your first forefathers."
27.
[pharaoh] said,978 "indeed, your 'messenger' who has been sent 
to you is mad."
28.
[moses] said, "lord of the east and the west and that between 
them, if you were to reason."
29.
[pharaoh] said, "if you take a god other than me, i will surely 
place you among those imprisoned."
30.
[moses] said, "even if i brought you something [i.e., proof] 
manifest?"
                                               
976the singular form in arabic indicates that both were sent with a single 
message.
977i.e., striking the copt, who died as a result.
978angrily addressing those present.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
356
31.
[pharaoh] said, "then bring it, if you should be of the truthful."
32.
so [moses] threw his staff, and suddenly it was a serpent 
manifest.979
33.
and he drew out his hand; thereupon it was white for the 
observers.
34.
[pharaoh] said to the eminent ones around him, "indeed, this 
is a learned magician.
35.
he wants to drive you out of your land by his magic, so what 
do you advise?"
36.
they said, "postpone [the matter of] him and his brother and 
send among the cities gatherers
37.
who will bring you every learned, skilled magician."
38.
so the magicians were assembled for the appointment of a 
well-known day.980
39.
and it was said to the people, "will you congregate
40.
that we might follow the magicians if they are the predominant?"
41.
and when the magicians arrived, they said to pharaoh, "is 
there indeed for us a reward if we are the predominant?"
42.
he said, "yes, and indeed, you will then be of those near [to 
me]."
43.
moses said to them, "throw whatever you will throw."
44.
so they threw their ropes and their staffs and said, "by the 
might of pharaoh, indeed it is we who are predominant."
45.
then moses threw his staff, and at once it devoured what they 
falsified.
46.
so the magicians fell down in prostration [to allah].
47.
they said, "we have believed in the lord of the worlds,
48.
the lord of moses and aaron."
                                               
979i.e., clearly genuine.
980i.e., the morning of the day of festival.  see 20:58-59.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
357
49.
[pharaoh] said, "you believed him [i.e., moses] before i gave 
you permission.  indeed, he is your leader who has taught you 
magic, but you are going to know.  i will surely cut off your 
hands and your feet on opposite sides, and i will surely crucify
you all."
50.
they said, "no harm.  indeed, to our lord we will return.
51.
indeed, we aspire that our lord will forgive us our sins because
we were the first of the believers."
52.
and we inspired to moses, "travel by night with my servants;
indeed, you will be pursued."
53.
then pharaoh sent among the cities gatherers981
54.
[and said], "indeed, those are but a small band,
55.
and indeed, they are enraging us,
56.
and indeed, we are a cautious society..."
57.
so we removed them from gardens and springs
58.
and treasures and honorable station982 –
59.
thus.  and we caused to inherit it the children of israel.
60.
so they pursued them at sunrise.
61.
and when the two companies saw one another, the companions
of moses said, "indeed, we are to be overtaken!"
62.
[moses] said, "no!  indeed, with me is my lord; he will guide
me."
63.
then we inspired to moses, "strike with your staff the sea," and 
it parted, and each portion was like a great towering mountain.
64.
and we advanced thereto the others [i.e., the pursuers].
65.
and we saved moses and those with him, all together.
66.
then we drowned the others.
                                               
981recruiters of an army to prevent the emigration of the children of israel.
982allah (subhanahu wa taala) caused them to abandon their wealth and 
property in pursuit of the israelites.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
358
67.
indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
68.
and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
69.
and recite to them the news of ibrahim,
70.
when he said to his father and his people, "what do you 
worship?"
71.
they said, "we worship idols and remain to them devoted."
72.
he said, "do they hear you when you supplicate?
73.
or do they benefit you, or do they harm?"
74.
they said, "but we found our fathers doing thus."
75.
he said, "then do you see what you have been worshipping,
76.
you and your ancient forefathers?
77.
indeed, they are enemies to me, except the lord of the worlds,983
78.
who created me, and he [it is who] guides me.
79.
and it is he who feeds me and gives me drink.
80.
and when i am ill, it is he who cures me
81.
and who will cause me to die and then bring me to life
82.
and who i aspire that he will forgive me my sin on the day 
of recompense."
83.
[and he said], "my lord, grant me authority and join me with 
the righteous.
84.
and grant me a mention [i.e., reputation] of honor among later 
generations.
85.
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of pleasure.
86.
and forgive my father.  indeed, he has been of those astray.
87.
and do not disgrace me on the day they are [all] resurrected –
88.
the day when there will not benefit [anyone] wealth or children
89.
but only one who comes to allah with a sound heart."
                                               
983the people worshipped idols in addition to allah.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
359
90. and paradise will be brought near [that day] to the righteous.
91. and hellfire will be brought forth for the deviators,
92. and it will be said to them, "where are those you used to worship
93. other than allah?  can they help you or help themselves?"
94. so they will be overturned into it [i.e., hellfire], they and the 
deviators
95. and the soldiers of iblees, all together.
96. they will say while they dispute therein,
97. "by allah, we were indeed in manifest error
98. when we equated you with the lord of the worlds.
99. and no one misguided us except the criminals.
100. so now we have no intercessors
101. and not a devoted friend.
102. then if we only had a return [to the world] and could be of the 
believers..."984
103. indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
104. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
105. the people of noah denied the messengers985
106. when their brother noah said to them, "will you not fear allah?
107. indeed, i am to you a trustworthy messenger.
108. so fear allah and obey me.
109. and i do not ask you for it any payment.  my payment is only 
from the lord of the worlds.
110. so fear allah and obey me."
111. they said, "should we believe you while you are followed by 
the lowest [class of people]?"
112. he said, "and what is my knowledge of what they used to do?
                                               
984the conclusion of this verse is estimated as "...we would do this or that."
985see footnote to 25:37.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
360
113. their account is only upon my lord, if you [could] perceive.
114. and i am not one to drive away the believers.
115. i am only a clear warner."
116. they said, "if you do not desist, o noah, you will surely be of 
those who are stoned."
117. he said, "my lord, indeed my people have denied me.
118. then judge between me and them with decisive judgement and
save me and those with me of the believers."
119. so we saved him and those with him in the laden ship.
120. then we drowned thereafter the remaining ones.
121. indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
122. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
123. aad denied the messengers
124. when their brother hud said to them, "will you not fear allah?
125. indeed, i am to you a trustworthy messenger.
126. so fear allah and obey me.
127. and i do not ask you for it any payment.  my payment is only 
from the lord of the worlds.
128. do you construct on every elevation a sign,986 amusing 
yourselves,
129. and take for yourselves constructions [i.e., palaces and fortresses]
that you might abide eternally?
130. and when you strike, you strike as tyrants.
131. so fear allah and obey me.
132. and fear he who provided you with that which you know,
133. provided you with grazing livestock and children
134. and gardens and springs.
                                               
986i.e., a symbol or indication of their wealth and power.  they used to build 
lofty structures along the road to be seen by all who passed by.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
361
135. indeed, i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day."
136. they said, "it is all the same to us whether you advise or are 
not of the advisors.
137. this is not but the custom of the former peoples,
138. and we are not to be punished."
139. and they denied him, so we destroyed them.  indeed in that is 
a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
140. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
141. thamud denied the messengers
142. when their brother salih said to them, "will you not fear allah?
143. indeed, i am to you a trustworthy messenger.
144. so fear allah and obey me.
145. and i do not ask you for it any payment.  my payment is only 
from the lord of the worlds.
146. will you be left in what is here, secure [from death],
147. within gardens and springs
148. and fields of crops and palm trees with softened fruit?
149. and you carve out of the mountains, homes, with skill.
150. so fear allah and obey me.
151. and do not obey the order of the transgressors,
152. who cause corruption in the land and do not amend."
153. they said, "you are only of those affected by magic.
154. you are but a man like ourselves, so bring a sign, if you should
be of the truthful."
155. he said, "this is a she-camel.987  for her is a [time of] drink, 
and for you is a [time of] drink, [each] on a known day.
156. and do not touch her with harm, lest you be seized by the 
punishment of a terrible day."
                                               
987miraculously sent to them as a sign by allah.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
362
157. but they hamstrung her and so became regretful.
158. and the punishment seized them.  indeed in that is a sign, but 
most of them were not to be believers.
159. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
160. the people of lot denied the messengers
161. when their brother lot said to them, "will you not fear allah?
162. indeed, i am to you a trustworthy messenger.
163. so fear allah and obey me.
164. and i do not ask you for it any payment.  my payment is only 
from the lord of the worlds.
165. do you approach males among the worlds988
166. and leave what your lord has created for you as mates?  but 
you are a people transgressing."
167. they said, "if you do not desist, o lot, you will surely be of 
those evicted."
168. he said, "indeed, i am, toward your deed, of those who detest 
[it].
169. my lord, save me and my family from [the consequence of] 
what they do."
170. so we saved him and his family, all,
171. except an old woman989 among those who remained behind.
172. then we destroyed the others.
173. and we rained upon them a rain [of stones], and evil was the 
rain of those who were warned.
174. indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
175. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
                                               
988i.e., are there, out of all allah's creatures, any besides you who commit 
this unnatural act?
989lot's wife, who had collaborated with the evildoers.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
363
176. the companions of the thicket [i.e., the people of madyan] 
denied the messengers
177. when shuayb said to them, "will you not fear allah?
178. indeed, i am to you a trustworthy messenger.
179. so fear allah and obey me.
180. and i do not ask you for it any payment.  my payment is only 
from the lord of the worlds.
181. give full measure and do not be of those who cause loss.
182. and weigh with an even [i.e., honest] balance.
183. and do not deprive people of their due and do not commit abuse
on earth, spreading corruption.
184. and fear he who created you and the former creation."990
185. they said, "you are only of those affected by magic.
186. you are but a man like ourselves, and indeed, we think you are
among the liars.
187. so cause to fall upon us fragments of the sky, if you should be 
of the truthful."
188. he said, "my lord is most knowing of what you do."
189. and they denied him, so the punishment of the day of the black
cloud seized them.  indeed, it was the punishment of a terrible 
day.
190. indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers.
191. and indeed, your lord – he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
192. and indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is the revelation of the lord of 
the worlds.
193. the trustworthy spirit [i.e., gabriel] has brought it down
194. upon your heart, [o muhammad] – that you may be of the 
warners –
195. in a clear arabic language.
                                               
990i.e., previous generations.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
364
196. and indeed, it is [mentioned] in the scriptures of former peoples.
197. and has it not been a sign to them that it is recognized by the 
scholars of the children of israel?
198. and even if we had revealed it to one among the foreigners991
199. and he had recited it to them [perfectly],992 they would [still] 
not have been believers in it.
200. thus have we inserted it [i.e., disbelief] into the hearts of the 
criminals.
201. they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment.
202. and it will come to them suddenly while they perceive [it] not.
203. and they will say, "may we be reprieved?"
204. so for our punishment are they impatient?
205. then have you considered if we gave them enjoyment for years
206. and then there came to them that which they were promised?
207. they would not be availed by the enjoyment with which they 
were provided.
208. and we did not destroy any city except that it had warners
209. as a reminder; and never have we been unjust.
210. and the devils have not brought it [i.e., the revelation] down.993
211. it is not allowable for them, nor would they be able.
212. indeed they, from [its] hearing, are removed.994
213. so do not invoke with allah another deity and [thus] be among
the punished.
214. and warn, [o muhammad], your closest kindred.
215. and lower your wing [i.e., show kindness] to those who follow 
you of the believers.
                                               
991i.e., the non-arabs or those who are not fluent in the arabic language.
992as a miracle from allah.
993as was asserted by the disbelievers.  rather, it was brought by gabriel, 
the trustworthy spirit.
994as mentioned in 72:9.

surah 26 – ash-shuara
juz 19
365
216. and if they disobey you, then say, "indeed, i am disassociated 
from what you are doing."
217. and rely upon the exalted in might, the merciful,
218. who sees you when you arise995
219. and your movement among those who prostrate.996
220. indeed, he is the hearing, the knowing.
221. shall i inform you upon whom the devils descend?
222. they descend upon every sinful liar.
223. they pass on what is heard,997 and most of them are liars.
224. and the poets – [only] the deviators follow them;
225. do you not see that in every valley they roam998
226. and that they say what they do not do? –
227. except those [poets] who believe and do righteous deeds and 
remember allah often and defend [the muslims]999 after they 
were wronged.  and those who have wronged are going to 
know to what [kind of] return they will be returned.
                                               
995from your bed at night for prayer while you are alone.
996i.e., among those who pray with you in congregation.
997this was before they were prevented, as described in 72:8-9.
998speaking lies indiscriminately and praising and disparaging others 
according to whim.
999by replying through poetry to the attacks of hostile poets.

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 19
366
surah an-naml
1000
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
$œ, seen.1001  these are the verses of the quran [i.e., recitation]
and a clear book
2.
as guidance and good tidings for the believers
3.
who establish prayer and give zakah, and of the hereafter they
are certain [in faith].
4.
indeed, for those who do not believe in the hereafter, we have
made pleasing to them their deeds, so they wander blindly.
5.
those are the ones for whom there will be the worst of 
punishment, and in the hereafter they are the greatest losers.
6.
and indeed, [o muhammad], you receive the quran from one 
wise and knowing.
7.
[mention] when moses said to his family, "indeed, i have 
perceived a fire.  i will bring you from there information or will
bring you a burning torch that you may warm yourselves."
8.
but when he came to it, he was called, "blessed is whoever is 
at the fire and whoever is around it.  and exalted is allah, 
lord of the worlds.
9.
o moses, indeed it is i – allah, the exalted in might, the wise."
10.
and [he was told], "throw down your staff."  but when he 
saw it writhing as if it were a snake, he turned in flight and did 
not return.1002  [allah said], "o moses, fear not.  indeed, in 
my presence the messengers do not fear.
11.
otherwise, he who wrongs, then substitutes good after evil –
indeed, i am forgiving and merciful.
12.
and put your hand into the opening of your garment [at the 
                                               
1000an-naml:  the ants.
1001see footnote to 2:1.
1002or "did not look back."

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 19
367
breast]; it will come out white without disease.  [these are] 
among the nine signs [you will take] to pharaoh and his people.  
indeed, they have been a people defiantly disobedient."
13.
but when there came to them our visible signs, they said, 
"this is obvious magic."
14.
and they rejected them, while their [inner] selves were convinced
thereof, out of injustice and haughtiness.  so see how was the 
end of the corrupters.
15.
and we had certainly given to david and solomon knowledge,
and they said, "praise [is due] to allah, who has favored us 
over many of his believing servants."
16.
and solomon inherited david.  he said, "o people, we have 
been taught the language of birds, and we have been given 
from all things.  indeed, this is evident bounty."
17.
and gathered for solomon were his soldiers of the jinn and 
men and birds, and they were [marching] in rows
18.
until, when they came upon the valley of the ants, an ant said, 
"o ants, enter your dwellings that you not be crushed by 
solomon and his soldiers while they perceive not."
19.
so [solomon] smiled, amused at her speech, and said, "my 
lord, enable me1003 to be grateful for your favor which you 
have bestowed upon me and upon my parents and to do 
righteousness of which you approve.  and admit me by your 
mercy into [the ranks of] your righteous servants."1004
20.
and he took attendance of the birds and said, "why do i not 
see the hoopoe – or is he among the absent?
21.
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter 
him unless he brings me clear authorization."
22.
but he [i.e., the hoopoe] stayed not long and said, "i have 
encompassed [in knowledge] that which you have not 
                                               
1003more literally, "gather within me the utmost strength and ability."
1004or "with your righteous servants [into paradise]."

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 19
368
encompassed, and i have come to you from sheba with certain 
news.
23.
indeed, i found [there] a woman ruling them, and she has been 
given of all things, and she has a great throne.
24.
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of 
allah, and satan has made their deeds pleasing to them and 
averted them from [his] way, so they are not guided,
25.
[and] so they do not prostrate to allah, who brings forth what 
is hidden within the heavens and the earth and knows what 
you conceal and what you declare –
26.
allah – there is no deity except him, lord of the great throne."
27.
[solomon] said, "we will see whether you were truthful or 
were of the liars.
28.
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them.  then leave 
them and see what [answer] they will return."
29.
she said, "o eminent ones, indeed, to me has been delivered a 
noble letter.
30.
indeed, it is from solomon, and indeed, it is [i.e., reads]:  'in the 
name of allah, the entirely merciful, the especially merciful,
31.
be not haughty with me but come to me in submission [as 
muslims].' "
32.
she said, "o eminent ones, advise me in my affair.  i would 
not decide a matter until you witness [for] me."1005
33.
they said, "we are men of strength and of great military might,
but the command is yours, so see what you will command."
34.
she said, "indeed kings – when they enter a city, they ruin it 
and render the honored of its people humbled.  and thus do 
they do.
35.
but indeed, i will send to them a gift and see with what [reply] 
the messengers will return."
                                               
1005i.e., are present with me or testify in my favor.

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 19
369
36.
so when they came to solomon, he said, "do you provide me 
with wealth?  but what allah has given me is better than what 
he has given you.  rather, it is you who rejoice in your gift.
37.
return to them, for we will surely come to them with soldiers 
that they will be powerless to encounter, and we will surely 
expel them therefrom in humiliation, and they will be debased."
38.
[solomon] said, "o assembly [of jinn], which of you will bring
me her throne before they come to me in submission?"
39.
a powerful one from among the jinn said, "i will bring it to 
you before you rise from your place, and indeed, i am for this 
[task] strong and trustworthy."
40.
said one who had knowledge from the scripture, "i will bring 
it to you before your glance returns to you."  and when 
[solomon] saw it placed before him, he said, "this is from the 
favor of my lord to test me whether i will be grateful or 
ungrateful.  and whoever is grateful – his gratitude is only for 
[the benefit of] himself.  and whoever is ungrateful – then 
indeed, my lord is free of need and generous."
41.
he said, "disguise for her her throne; we will see whether she
will be guided [to truth] or will be of those who is not guided."
42.
so when she arrived, it was said [to her], "is your throne like 
this?"  she said, "[it is] as though it was it."  [solomon said], 
"and we were given knowledge before her, and we have been 
muslims [in submission to allah].
43.
and that which she was worshipping other than allah had 
averted her [from submission to him].  indeed, she was from 
a disbelieving people."
44.
she was told, "enter the palace."  but when she saw it, she 
thought it was a body of water1006 and uncovered her shins [to 
wade through].  he said, "indeed, it is a palace [whose floor is]
made smooth with glass."  she said, "my lord, indeed i have 
wronged myself, and i submit with solomon to allah, lord of 
the worlds."
                                               
1006the floor was transparent, and beneath it was flowing water.

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 19
370
45.
and we had certainly sent to thamud their brother salih, 
[saying], "worship allah," and at once they were two parties 
conflicting.
46.
he said, "o my people, why are you impatient for evil before 
[i.e., instead of] good?1007  why do you not seek forgiveness 
of allah that you may receive mercy?"
47.
they said, "we consider you a bad omen, you and those with 
you."  he said, "your omen [i.e., fate] is with allah.  rather, 
you are a people being tested."1008
48.
and there were in the city nine family heads causing corruption
in the land and not amending [its affairs].
49.
they said, "take a mutual oath by allah that we will kill him by 
night, he and his family.  then we will say to his executor,1009
'we did not witness the destruction of his family, and indeed, 
we are truthful.'"
50.
and they planned a plan, and we planned a plan, while they 
perceived not.
51.
then look how was the outcome of their plan – that we destroyed
them and their people, all.
52.
so those are their houses, desolate because of the wrong they 
had done.  indeed in that is a sign for people who know.
53.
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah.
54.
and [mention] lot, when he said to his people, "do you commit
immorality1010 while you are seeing?1011
55.
do you indeed approach men with desire instead of women?  
rather, you are a people behaving ignorantly."
                                               
1007by challenging salih to bring on the promised punishment rather than 
asking for mercy from allah.
1008or "being tempted [by satan]."
1009i.e., the one responsible for executing his will and avenging his blood.
1010homosexual acts.
1011i.e., openly.  another meaning is "...while you are aware [that it is wrong]."

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 20
371
56.
but the answer of his people was not except that they said, 
"expel the family of lot from your city.  indeed, they are 
people who keep themselves pure."
57.
so we saved him and his family, except for his wife; we 
destined her to be of those who remained behind.
58.
and we rained upon them a rain [of stones], and evil was the 
rain of those who were warned.
59.
say, [o muhammad], "praise be to allah, and peace upon his 
servants whom he has chosen.  is allah better or what they 
associate with him?"
60.
[more precisely], is he [not best] who created the heavens and 
the earth and sent down for you rain from the sky, causing to 
grow thereby gardens of joyful beauty which you could not 
[otherwise] have grown the trees thereof?  is there a deity with 
allah?1012  [no], but they are a people who ascribe equals [to 
him].
61.
is he [not best] who made the earth a stable ground and placed
within it rivers and made for it firmly set mountains and placed
between the two seas a barrier?  is there a deity with allah?  
[no], but most of them do not know.
62.
is he [not best] who responds to the desperate one when he 
calls upon him and removes evil and makes you inheritors of 
the earth?1013  is there a deity with allah?  little do you 
remember.
63.
is he [not best] who guides you through the darknesses of the 
land and sea and who sends the winds as good tidings before 
his mercy?  is there a deity with allah?  high is allah above 
whatever they associate with him.
64.
is he [not best] who begins creation and then repeats it and 
who provides for you from the heaven and earth?  is there a 
                                               
1012three meanings are implied:  "is there another god who did all of this 
with allah?" or "is there any deity worthy to be worshipped along with 
allah?" or "is there a deity to be compared with allah?"
1013generation after generation.

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 20
372
deity with allah?  say, "produce your proof, if you should be 
truthful."
65.
say, "none in the heavens and earth knows the unseen except
allah, and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected."
66.
rather, their knowledge is arrested concerning the hereafter.  
rather, they are in doubt about it.  rather, they are, concerning
it, blind.
67.
and those who disbelieve say, "when we have become dust 
as well as our forefathers, will we indeed be brought out [of 
the graves]?
68.
we have been promised this, we and our forefathers, before.  
this is not but legends of the former peoples."
69.
say, [o muhammad], "proceed [i.e., travel] through the land 
and observe how was the end of the criminals."
70.
and grieve not over them or be in distress from what they 
conspire.
71.
and they say, "when is [the fulfillment of] this promise, if 
you should be truthful?"
72.
say, "perhaps it is close behind you [i.e., very near] – some of 
that for which you are impatient.
73.
and indeed, your lord is full of bounty for the people, but 
most of them do not show gratitude."
74.
and indeed, your lord knows what their breasts conceal and 
what they declare.
75.
and there is nothing concealed1014 within the heaven and the 
earth except that it is in a clear register.1015
76.
indeed, this quran relates to the children of israel most of 
that over which they disagree.
77.
and indeed, it is guidance and mercy for the believers.
                                               
1014literally, "absent [from the senses]."
1015the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), which is with allah (subhanahu
wa taala).

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 20
373
78.
indeed, your lord will judge between them by his [wise] 
judgement.  and he is the exalted in might, the knowing.
79.
so rely upon allah; indeed, you are upon the clear truth.
80.
indeed, you will not make the dead hear, nor will you make the 
deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating.
81.
and you cannot guide the blind away from their error.  you 
will only make hear those who believe in our verses so they 
are muslims [i.e., submitting to allah].
82.
and when the word [i.e., decree] befalls them,1016 we will 
bring forth for them a creature from the earth speaking to 
them, [saying] that the people were, of our verses, not certain 
[in faith].
83.
and [warn of] the day when we will gather from every 
nation a company of those who deny our signs, and they will 
be [driven] in rows
84.
until, when they arrive [at the place of judgement], he will say, 
"did you deny my signs while you encompassed them not in 
knowledge, or what [was it that] you were doing?"
85.
and the decree will befall them1017 for the wrong they did, and 
they will not [be able to] speak.
86.
do they not see that we made the night that they may rest 
therein and the day giving sight?  indeed in that are signs for a 
people who believe.
87.
and [warn of] the day the horn will be blown, and whoever 
is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be terrified 
except whom allah wills.  and all will come to him humbled.
88.
and you see the mountains, thinking them rigid, while they 
will pass as the passing of clouds.  [it is] the work of allah, 
who perfected all things.  indeed, he is acquainted with that 
which you do.
                                               
1016at the approach of the hour.
1017allah's decree will come into effect upon them, and his promise will be 
fulfilled.

surah 27 – an-naml
juz 20
374
89.
whoever comes [at judgement] with a good deed will have
better than it, and they, from the terror of that day, will be safe.
90.
and whoever comes with an evil deed1018 – their faces will be 
overturned into the fire, [and it will be said], "are you 
recompensed except for what you used to do?"
91.
[say, o muhammad], "i have only been commanded to worship
the lord of this city,1019 who made it sacred and to whom
[belongs] all things.  and i am commanded to be of the muslims
[i.e., those who submit to allah]
92.
and to recite the quran."  and whoever is guided is only 
guided for [the benefit of] himself; and whoever strays – say, 
"i am only [one] of the warners."
93.
and say, "[all] praise is [due] to allah.  he will show you his 
signs, and you will recognize them.  and your lord is not 
unaware of what you do."
                                               
1018without having repented.  it may refer generally to any sin or more 
specifically to association of another with allah.
1019or region, meaning makkah and its surroundings.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
375
surah al-qasas
1020
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. $œ, seen, meem.1021
2. these are verses of the clear book.
3. we recite to you from the news of moses and pharaoh in truth 
for a people who believe.
4. indeed, pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people 
into factions, oppressing a sector among them, slaughtering their
[newborn] sons and keeping their females alive.  indeed, he was 
of the corrupters.
5. and we wanted to confer favor upon those who were oppressed 
in the land and make them leaders and make them inheritors
6. and establish them in the land and show pharaoh and [his 
minister] haman and their soldiers through them1022 that which 
they had feared.
7. and we inspired to the mother of moses, "suckle him; but when
you fear for him, cast him into the river and do not fear and do 
not grieve.  indeed, we will return him to you and will make 
him [one] of the messengers."
8. and the family of pharaoh picked him up [out of the river] so 
that he would become to them an enemy and a [cause of] grief.  
indeed, pharaoh and haman and their soldiers were deliberate 
sinners.
9. and the wife of pharaoh said, "[he will be] a comfort of the eye 
[i.e., pleasure] for me and for you.  do not kill him; perhaps he 
may benefit us, or we may adopt him as a son."  and they 
perceived not.1023
                                               
1020al-qasas:  the narrative (or story).
1021see footnote to 2:1.
1022by means of those whom they had oppressed and enslaved.
1023what would be the result of that.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
376
10.
and the heart of moses' mother became empty [of all else].  
she was about to disclose [the matter concerning] him had we 
not bound fast her heart that she would be of the believers.
11.
and she said to his sister, "follow him"; so she watched him 
from a distance while they perceived not.
12.
and we had prevented from him [all] wet nurses before,1024
so she said, "shall i direct you to a household that will be 
responsible for him for you while they are to him [for his 
upbringing] sincere?"
13.
so we restored him to his mother that she might be content 
and not grieve and that she would know that the promise of 
allah is true. but most of them [i.e., the people] do not know.
14.
and when he attained his full strength and was [mentally] 
mature, we bestowed upon him judgement and knowledge.  
and thus do we reward the doers of good.
15.
and he entered the city at a time of inattention by its people1025
and found therein two men fighting:  one from his faction and 
one from among his enemy.  and the one from his faction called 
for help to him against the one from his enemy, so moses 
struck him and [unintentionally] killed him.  [moses] said, 
"this is from the work of satan.  indeed, he is a manifest, 
misleading enemy."
16.
he said, "my lord, indeed i have wronged myself, so forgive 
me," and he forgave him.  indeed, he is the forgiving, the 
merciful.
17.
he said, "my lord, for the favor you bestowed upon me, i 
will never be an assistant to the criminals."
18.
and he became inside the city fearful and anticipating [exposure],
when suddenly the one who sought his help the previous day 
cried out to him [once again].  moses said to him, "indeed, 
you are an evident, [persistent] deviator."
                                               
1024prior to that, moses had refused to nurse from any other woman.
1025i.e., during the noon period of rest.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
377
19.
and when he wanted to strike the one who was an enemy to 
both of them, he1026 said, "o moses, do you intend to kill me 
as you killed someone yesterday?  you only want to be a tyrant 
in the land and do not want to be of the amenders."
20.
and a man came from the farthest end of the city, running.  
he said, "o moses, indeed the eminent ones are conferring over
you [intending] to kill you, so leave [the city]; indeed, i am to 
you of the sincere advisors."
21.
so he left it, fearful and anticipating [apprehension].  he said, 
"my lord, save me from the wrongdoing people."
22.
and when he directed himself toward madyan, he said, 
"perhaps my lord will guide me to the sound way."
23.
and when he came to the water [i.e., well] of madyan, he 
found there a crowd of people watering [their flocks], and he 
found aside from them two women driving back [their flocks].  
he said, "what is your circumstance?"  they said, "we do not 
water until the shepherds dispatch [their flocks]; and our father
is an old man."
24.
so he watered [their flocks] for them; then he went back to the 
shade and said, "my lord, indeed i am, for whatever good 
you would send down to me, in need."
25.
then one of the two women came to him walking with shyness.  
she said, "indeed, my father invites you that he may reward 
you for having watered for us."  so when he came to him1027
and related to him the story, he said, "fear not.  you have 
escaped from the wrongdoing people."
26.
one of the women said, "o my father, hire him.  indeed, the 
best one you can hire is the strong and the trustworthy."
27.
he said, "indeed, i wish to wed you one of these, my two 
                                               
1026i.e., the israelite, thinking that moses meant to strike him.  some
commentators have attributed the words to the copt; however, the 
israelite was the only one who knew of the previous occurrence.
1027prophet shuayb, the father of the two women.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
378
daughters, on [the condition] that you serve me for eight years;
but if you complete ten, it will be [as a favor] from you.  and i
do not wish to put you in difficulty.  you will find me, if allah
wills, from among the righteous."
28.
[moses] said, "that is [established] between me and you.  
whichever of the two terms i complete – there is no injustice 
to me, and allah, over what we say, is witness."
29.
and when moses had completed the term and was traveling 
with his family, he perceived from the direction of the mount a 
fire.  he said to his family, "stay here; indeed, i have perceived
a fire.  perhaps i will bring you from there [some] information 
or burning wood from the fire that you may warm yourselves."
30.
but when he came to it, he was called from the right side of the
valley in a blessed spot – from the tree,1028 "o moses, indeed i 
am allah, lord of the worlds."
31.
and [he was told], "throw down your staff."  but when he 
saw it writhing as if it was a snake, he turned in flight and did 
not return.1029  [allah said], "o moses, approach and fear not.  
indeed, you are of the secure.
32.
insert your hand into the opening of your garment; it will come
out white, without disease.  and draw in your arm close to you
[as prevention] from fear, for those are two proofs from your 
lord to pharaoh and his establishment.  indeed, they have been
a people defiantly disobedient."
33.
he said, "my lord, indeed i killed from among them someone,
and i fear they will kill me.
34.
and my brother aaron is more fluent than me in tongue, so 
send him with me as support, verifying me.  indeed, i fear that 
they will deny me."
35.
[allah] said, "we will strengthen your arm through your brother
and grant you both supremacy so they will not reach you.  [it 
                                               
1028which was within the fire.
1029or "did not look back."

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
379
will be] through our signs; you and those who follow you will 
be the predominant."
36.
but when moses came to them with our signs as clear evidences,
they said, "this is not except invented magic, and we have not 
heard of this [religion] among our forefathers."
37.
and moses said, "my lord is more knowing [than we or you] 
of who has come with guidance from him and to whom will 
be succession in the home.1030  indeed, wrongdoers do not 
succeed."
38.
and pharaoh said, "o eminent ones, i have not known you to 
have a god other than me.  then ignite for me, o haman, [a 
fire] upon the clay1031 and make for me a tower that i may 
look at the god of moses.  and indeed, i do think he is among 
the liars."
39.
and he was arrogant, he and his soldiers, in the land, without 
right, and they thought that they would not be returned to us.
40.
so we took him and his soldiers and threw them into the sea.1032  
so see how was the end of the wrongdoers.
41.
and we made them leaders1033 inviting to the fire, and on the 
day of resurrection they will not be helped.
42.
and we caused to overtake them in this world a curse, and on 
the day of resurrection they will be of the despised.1034
43.
and we gave moses the scripture, after we had destroyed the 
former generations, as enlightenment for the people and guidance
and mercy that they might be reminded.
                                               
1030i.e., in this world or in the hereafter.
1031from which bricks are made.
1032allah (subhanahu wa taala) caused them to leave all their worldly 
wealth behind and enter the sea in pursuit of the children of israel.  see 
26:52-66.
1033i.e., examples or precedents, followed by subsequent tyrants.
1034literally, "those made hideous," who will be far removed from all good 
and mercy.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
380
44.
and you, [o muhammad], were not on the western side [of 
the mount] when we revealed to moses the command, and 
you were not among the witnesses [to that].
45.
but we produced [many] generations [after moses], and 
prolonged was their duration.1035  and you were not a resident 
among the people of madyan, reciting to them our verses, but 
we were senders [of this message].1036
46.
and you were not at the side of the mount when we called 
[moses] but [were sent] as a mercy from your lord to warn a 
people to whom no warner had come before you that they 
might be reminded.
47.
and if not that a disaster should strike them for what their 
hands put forth [of sins] and they would say, "our lord, why 
did you not send us a messenger so we could have followed 
your verses and been among the believers?"...1037
48.
but when the truth came to them from us, they said, "why 
was he not given like that which was given to moses?"  did 
they not disbelieve in that which was given to moses before?  
they said, "[they are but] two works of magic supporting 
each other,1038 and indeed we are, in both, disbelievers."
49.
say, "then bring a scripture from allah which is more guiding 
than either of them that i may follow it, if you should be 
truthful."
50.
but if they do not respond to you – then know that they only 
follow their [own] desires.  and who is more astray than one 
who follows his desire without guidance from allah?  indeed, 
allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
                                               
1035so they forgot and neglected the ordinances of allah.
1036the prophet () had no way of obtaining this information except 
through allah's revelation.
1037the conclusion of the sentence is understood to be "...we would not 
have sent messengers," meaning that allah (subhanahu wa taala) sent 
messengers and sent muhammad () with the final scripture to 
mankind so that no one could claim that punishment was imposed 
unjustly without warning.
1038the reference is by the disbelievers of quraysh to the quran and the torah.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
381
51.
and we have [repeatedly] conveyed to them the word [i.e., 
the quran] that they might be reminded.
52.
those to whom we gave the scripture before it – they1039 are 
believers in it.
53.
and when it is recited to them, they say, "we have believed in 
it; indeed, it is the truth from our lord.  indeed we were, 
[even] before it, muslims [i.e., submitting to allah]."
54.
those will be given their reward twice for what they patiently 
endured and [because] they avert evil through good, and from 
what we have provided them they spend.
55.
and when they hear ill speech, they turn away from it and say,
"for us are our deeds, and for you are your deeds.  peace will 
be upon you;1040 we seek not the ignorant."
56.
indeed, [o muhammad], you do not guide whom you like, but 
allah guides whom he wills.  and he is most knowing of the 
[rightly] guided.
57.
and they [i.e., the quraysh] say, "if we were to follow the 
guidance with you, we would be swept1041 from our land."  
have we not established for them a safe sanctuary to which 
are brought the fruits of all things as provision from us?  but 
most of them do not know.
58.
and how many a city have we destroyed that was insolent in 
its [way of] living, and those are their dwellings which have 
not been inhabited after them except briefly.1042  and it is we 
who were the inheritors.
59.
and never would your lord have destroyed the cities until he 
had sent to their mother [i.e., principal city] a messenger
reciting to them our verses.  and we would not destroy the 
cities except while their people were wrongdoers.
                                               
1039i.e., the sincere believers among them.
1040this is not the islamic greeting of "peace be upon you."  rather, it means
"you are secure from being treated in a like manner by us."
1041by the other arab tribes.
1042by travelers seeking temporary shelter.  the reference is to the ruins 
which were visible to the quraysh during their journeys.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
382
60.
and whatever thing you [people] have been given – it is [only for] 
the enjoyment of worldly life and its adornment.  and what is
with allah is better and more lasting; so will you not use reason?
61.
then is he whom we have promised a good promise which he 
will meet [i.e., obtain] like he for whom we provided 
enjoyment of worldly life [but] then he is, on the day of 
resurrection, among those presented [for punishment in hell]?
62.
and [warn of] the day he will call them and say, "where are 
my 'partners' which you used to claim?"
63.
those upon whom the word1043 will have come into effect will 
say, "our lord, these are the ones we led to error.  we led them
to error just as we were in error.  we declare our disassociation
[from them] to you.  they did not used to worship [i.e., obey] 
us."1044
64.
and it will be said, "invoke your 'partners,'" and they will 
invoke them; but they will not respond to them, and they will 
see the punishment.  if only they had followed guidance!
65.
and [mention] the day he will call them and say, "what did 
you answer the messengers?"
66.
but the information1045 will be unapparent to them that day, 
so they will not [be able to] ask one another.
67.
but as for one who had repented, believed, and done 
righteousness, it is expected [i.e., promised by allah] that he 
will be among the successful.
68.
and your lord creates what he wills and chooses; not for them
was the choice.  exalted is allah and high above what they 
associate with him.
69.
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what 
they declare.
                                               
1043the decree for their punishment.
1044i.e., we did not compel them, and they did not obey us; instead, they 
obeyed their own desires and inclinations.
1045by which they might invent lies or excuses.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
383
70.
and he is allah; there is no deity except him.  to him is 
[due all] praise in the first [life] and the hereafter.  and his is 
the [final] decision, and to him you will be returned.
71.
say, "have you considered:1046  if allah should make for you 
the night continuous until the day of resurrection, what deity 
other than allah could bring you light?  then will you not hear?"
72.
say, "have you considered:  if allah should make for you the 
day continuous until the day of resurrection, what deity other 
than allah could bring you a night in which you may rest?  
then will you not see?"
73.
and out of his mercy he made for you the night and the day 
that you may rest therein and [by day] seek from his bounty 
and [that] perhaps you will be grateful.
74.
and [warn of] the day he will call them and say, "where are 
my 'partners' which you used to claim?"
75.
and we will extract from every nation a witness and say, 
"produce your proof," and they will know that the truth belongs
to allah, and lost from them is that which they used to invent.
76.
indeed, qarun was from the people of moses, but he tyrannized
them.  and we gave him of treasures whose keys would burden
a band of strong men; thereupon his people said to him, "do 
not exult.  indeed, allah does not like the exultant.
77.
but seek, through that which allah has given you, the home of 
the hereafter; and [yet], do not forget your share of the world.  
and do good as allah has done good to you.  and desire not 
corruption in the land.  indeed, allah does not like corrupters."
78.
he said, "i was only given it because of knowledge i have."  
did he not know that allah had destroyed before him of 
generations those who were greater than him in power and 
greater in accumulation [of wealth]?  but the criminals, about 
their sins, will not be asked.1047
                                               
1046meaning "inform me if you really know."
1047there will be no need to enumerate their sins separately, as their quantity
is obvious and more than sufficient to warrant punishment in hell.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
384
79.
so he came out before his people in his adornment.  those 
who desired the worldly life said, "oh, would that we had like 
what was given to qarun.  indeed, he is one of great fortune."
80.
but those who had been given knowledge said, "woe to you!  
the reward of allah is better for he who believes and does 
righteousness.  and none are granted it except the patient."
81.
and we caused the earth to swallow him and his home.  and 
there was for him no company to aid him other than allah, nor 
was he of those who [could] defend themselves.
82.
and those who had wished for his position the previous day 
began to say, "oh, how allah extends provision to whom he 
wills of his servants and restricts it!  if not that allah had 
conferred favor on us, he would have caused it to swallow us.  
oh, how the disbelievers do not succeed!"
83.
that home of the hereafter we assign to those who do not 
desire exaltedness upon the earth or corruption.  and the [best]
outcome is for the righteous.
84.
whoever comes [on the day of judgement] with a good deed 
will have better than it; and whoever comes with an evil deed –
then those who did evil deeds will not be recompensed except 
[as much as] what they used to do.
85.
indeed, [o muhammad], he who imposed upon you the quran
will take you back to a place of return.1048  say, "my lord is 
most knowing of who brings guidance and who is in clear error."
86.
and you were not expecting that the book would be conveyed 
to you, but [it is] a mercy from your lord.  so do not be an 
assistant to the disbelievers.1049
87.
and never let them avert you from the verses of allah after 
they have been revealed to you.  and invite [people] to your 
lord.  and never be of those who associate others with allah.
                                               
1048meaning to makkah (in this life) or to paradise (in the hereafter).
1049in their religion by making any concessions to their beliefs.

surah 28 – al-qasas
juz 20
385
88.
and do not invoke with allah another deity.  there is no deity 
except him.  everything will be destroyed except his face.1050  
his is the judgement, and to him you will be returned.
                                               
1050i.e., except himself.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 20
386
surah al-ankabut
1051
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
alif, lam, meem.1052
2.
do the people think that they will be left to say, "we believe" 
and they will not be tried?
3.
but we have certainly tried those before them, and allah will 
surely make evident those who are truthful, and he will surely 
make evident the liars.
4.
or do those who do evil deeds think they can outrun [i.e., 
escape] us?  evil is what they judge.
5.
whoever should hope for the meeting with allah – indeed, the 
term [decreed by] allah is coming.  and he is the hearing, 
the knowing.
6.
and whoever strives only strives for [the benefit of] himself.  
indeed, allah is free from need of the worlds.
7.
and those who believe and do righteous deeds – we will surely
remove from them their misdeeds and will surely reward them 
according to the best of what they used to do.
8.
and we have enjoined upon man goodness to parents.  but if 
they endeavor to make you associate with me that of which you 
have no knowledge,1053 do not obey them.  to me is your return,
and i will inform you about what you used to do.
9.
and those who believe and do righteous deeds – we will surely
admit them among the righteous [into paradise].
10.
and of the people are some who say, "we believe in allah," 
but when one [of them] is harmed for [the cause of] allah, 
they consider the trial [i.e., harm] of the people as [if it were] 
                                               
1051al-ankabut:  the spider.
1052see footnote to 2:1.
1053i.e., no knowledge of its divinity.  there can be no knowledge about 
something which is non-existent or untrue.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 20
387
the punishment of allah.  but if victory comes from your lord,
they say, "indeed, we were with you."  is not allah most knowing
of what is within the breasts of the worlds [i.e., all creatures]?
11.
and allah will surely make evident those who believe, and 
he will surely make evident the hypocrites.
12.
and those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "follow 
our way, and we will carry your sins."1054  but they will not 
carry anything of their sins.  indeed, they are liars.
13.
but they will surely carry their [own] burdens and [other] 
burdens along with their burdens,1055 and they will surely be 
questioned on the day of resurrection about what they used 
to invent.
14.
and we certainly sent noah to his people, and he remained 
among them a thousand years minus fifty years, and the flood 
seized them while they were wrongdoers.
15.
but we saved him and the companions of the ship, and we 
made it1056 a sign for the worlds.
16.
and [we sent] ibrahim, when he said to his people, "worship 
allah and fear him.  that is best for you, if you should know.
17.
you only worship, besides allah, idols, and you produce a 
falsehood.  indeed, those you worship besides allah do not 
possess for you [the power of] provision.  so seek from allah 
provision and worship him and be grateful to him.  to him 
you will be returned."
18.
and if you [people] deny [the message] – already nations 
before you have denied.  and there is not upon the messenger 
except [the duty of] clear notification.1057
                                               
1054the phrase may also read:  "and let us carry your sins," i.e., the responsibility
for your sins.
1055besides their own sins, they will carry those of the people they misled, 
although it will not lessen the burden of the latter.
1056i.e., the ship, the event or the story.
1057commentators have differed over this verse – whether it is a continuation
of the words of prophet ibrahim or words of comfort given by allah to 
prophet muhammad (), which according to context seems more likely.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 20
388
19.
have they not considered how allah begins creation and then 
repeats it?  indeed that, for allah, is easy.
20.
say, [o muhammad], "travel through the land and observe how 
he began creation.  then allah will produce the final creation
[i.e., development].  indeed allah, over all things, is competent."
21.
he punishes whom he wills and has mercy upon whom he wills,
and to him you will be returned.
22.
and you will not cause failure [to allah] upon the earth or in 
the heaven.  and you have not other than allah any protector 
or any helper.
23.
and the ones who disbelieve in the signs of allah and the 
meeting with him – those have despaired of my mercy, and 
they will have a painful punishment.
24.
and the answer of his [i.e., ibrahim's] people was not but that 
they said, "kill him or burn him," but allah saved him from 
the fire.  indeed in that are signs for a people who believe.
25.
and [ibrahim] said, "you have only taken, other than allah, 
idols as [a bond of] affection among you in worldly life.  then 
on the day of resurrection you will deny one another and 
curse one another, and your refuge will be the fire, and you 
will not have any helpers."
26.
and lot believed him.  [ibrahim] said, "indeed, i will emigrate
to [the service of] my lord.  indeed, he is the exalted in might,
the wise."
27.
and we gave to him isaac and jacob and placed in his 
descendants prophethood and scripture.  and we gave him his 
reward in this world, and indeed, he is in the hereafter among 
the righteous.
28.
and [mention] lot, when he said to his people, "indeed, you
commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from
among the worlds.
29.
indeed, you approach men and obstruct the road1058 and commit
in your meetings [every] evil."  and the answer of his people 
                                               
1058i.e., commit highway robbery and acts of aggression against travelers.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 20
389
was not but that they said, "bring us the punishment of allah, 
if you should be of the truthful."
30.
he said, "my lord, support me against the corrupting people."
31.
and when our messengers [i.e., angels] came to ibrahim 
with the good tidings,1059 they said, "indeed, we will destroy 
the people of that [i.e., lot's] city.  indeed, its people have been
wrongdoers."
32.
[ibrahim] said, "indeed, within it is lot."  they said, "we are
more knowing of who is within it.  we will surely save him 
and his family, except his wife.  she is to be of those who 
remain behind."
33.
and when our messengers [i.e., angels] came to lot, he was 
distressed for them and felt for them great discomfort.1060  
they said, "fear not, nor grieve.  indeed, we will save you and
your family, except your wife; she is to be of those who remain
behind.
34.
indeed, we will bring down on the people of this city punishment
from the sky because they have been defiantly disobedient."
35.
and we have certainly left of it a sign as clear evidence for a 
people who use reason.
36.
and to madyan [we sent] their brother shuayb, and he said, 
"o my people, worship allah and expect the last day and do 
not commit abuse on the earth, spreading corruption."
37.
but they denied him, so the earthquake seized them, and they 
became within their home [corpses] fallen prone.
38.
and [we destroyed] aad and thamud, and it has become clear 
to you from their [ruined] dwellings.  and satan had made 
pleasing to them their deeds and averted them from the path,
and they were endowed with perception.
                                               
1059of the birth of isaac and his descendant, jacob.
1060see footnote to 11:77.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 21
390
39.
and [we destroyed] qarun and pharaoh and haman.  and 
moses had already come to them with clear evidences, and 
they were arrogant in the land, but they were not outrunners 
[of our punishment].
40.
so each we seized for his sin; and among them were those 
upon whom we sent a storm of stones, and among them were 
those who were seized by the blast [from the sky], and among 
them were those whom we caused the earth to swallow, and 
among them were those whom we drowned.  and allah would
not have wronged them, but it was they who were wronging 
themselves.
41.
the example of those who take allies other than allah is like 
that of the spider who takes [i.e., constructs] a home.  and 
indeed, the weakest of homes is the home of the spider, if they 
only knew.
42.
indeed, allah knows whatever thing they call upon other than 
him.  and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
43.
and these examples we present to the people, but none will 
understand them except those of knowledge.
44.
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth.  indeed in 
that is a sign for the believers.
45.
recite, [o muhammad], what has been revealed to you of the 
book and establish prayer.  indeed, prayer prohibits immorality
and wrongdoing, and the remembrance of allah is greater.  
and allah knows that which you do.
46.
and do not argue with the people of the scripture except in a 
way that is best, except for those who commit injustice among 
them, and say, "we believe in that which has been revealed to 
us and revealed to you.  and our god and your god is one; 
and we are muslims [in submission] to him."
47.
and thus we have sent down to you the book [i.e., the quran].  
and those to whom we [previously] gave the scripture believe
in it.  and among these [people of makkah] are those who believe
in it.  and none reject our verses except the disbelievers.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 21
391
48.
and you did not recite before it any scripture, nor did you inscribe
one with your right hand.  then [i.e., otherwise] the falsifiers 
would have had [cause for] doubt.
49.
rather, it [i.e., the quran] is distinct verses [preserved] within 
the breasts of those who have been given knowledge.  and 
none reject our verses except the wrongdoers.
50.
but they say, "why are not signs sent down to him from his 
lord?"  say, "the signs are only with allah, and i am only a 
clear warner."
51.
and is it not sufficient for them that we revealed to you the 
book [i.e., the quran] which is recited to them?  indeed in 
that is a mercy and reminder for a people who believe.
52.
say, "sufficient is allah between me and you as witness.  he 
knows what is in the heavens and earth.  and they who have 
believed in falsehood and disbelieved in allah – it is those 
who are the losers."
53.
and they urge you to hasten the punishment.  and if not for 
[the decree of] a specified term, punishment would have 
reached them.  but it will surely come to them suddenly while 
they perceive not.
54.
they urge you to hasten the punishment.  and indeed, hell 
will be encompassing of the disbelievers
55.
on the day the punishment will cover them from above them 
and from below their feet and it is said, "taste [the result of] 
what you used to do."
56.
o my servants who have believed, indeed my earth is spacious,
so worship only me.
57.
every soul will taste death.  then to us will you be returned.
58.
and those who have believed and done righteous deeds – we will
surely assign to them of paradise [elevated] chambers beneath 
which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally.  excellent is
the reward of the [righteous] workers
59.
who have been patient and upon their lord rely.

surah 29 – al-ankabut
juz 21
392
60.
and how many a creature carries not its [own] provision.  allah 
provides for it and for you.  and he is the hearing, the knowing.
61.
if you asked them, "who created the heavens and earth and 
subjected the sun and the moon?" they would surely say, 
"allah."  then how are they deluded?
62.
allah extends provision for whom he wills of his servants 
and restricts for him.  indeed allah is, of all things, knowing.
63.
and if you asked them, "who sends down rain from the sky 
and gives life thereby to the earth after its lifelessness?" they 
would surely say, "allah."  say, "praise to allah"; but most of 
them do not reason.
64.
and this worldly life is not but diversion and amusement.  
and indeed, the home of the hereafter – that is the [eternal] life,
if only they knew.
65.
and when they board a ship, they supplicate allah, sincere to 
him in religion [i.e., faith and hope].  but when he delivers 
them to the land, at once they associate others with him
66.
so that they will deny what we have granted them, and they 
will enjoy themselves. but they are going to know.1061
67.
have they not seen that we made [makkah] a safe sanctuary, 
while people are being taken away1062 all around them?  then 
in falsehood do they believe, and in the favor of allah they 
disbelieve?
68.
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie about allah
or denies the truth when it has come to him?  is there not in 
hell a [sufficient] residence for the disbelievers?
69.
and those who strive for us – we will surely guide them to 
our ways.1063  and indeed, allah is with the doers of good.
                                               
1061grammatically, the verse may also be read as a threat, i.e., "so let them 
deny what we have granted them and let them enjoy themselves, for 
they are going to know."
1062i.e., killed and taken captive.
1063the various ways and means to attain the acceptance and pleasure of allah.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
393
surah ar-rum
1064
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. alif, lam, meem.1065
2. the byzantines have been defeated1066
3. in the nearest land.  but they, after their defeat, will overcome
4. within three to nine years.  to allah belongs the command 
[i.e., decree] before and after.  and that day the believers will 
rejoice
5. in the victory of allah.1067  he gives victory to whom he wills, 
and he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
6. [it is] the promise of allah.  allah does not fail in his promise, 
but most of the people do not know.
7. they know what is apparent of the worldly life, but they, of the 
hereafter, are unaware.
8. do they not contemplate within themselves?1068  allah has not 
created the heavens and the earth and what is between them 
except in truth and for a specified term.  and indeed, many of 
the people, in the meeting with their lord, are disbelievers.
9. have they not traveled through the earth and observed how was 
the end of those before them?  they were greater than them in 
power, and they plowed [or excavated] the earth and built it up 
more than they [i.e., the makkans] have built it up, and their 
messengers came to them with clear evidences.  and allah 
would not ever have wronged them, but they were wronging 
themselves.
                                               
1064ar-rum:  the byzantines (of the eastern roman empire) or romaeans.
1065see footnote to 2:1.
1066by the persians.
1067i.e., the victory given by allah to a people of the scripture (christians) 
over the magians of persia.
1068an additional meaning is "do they not contemplate concerning themselves."

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
394
10.
then the end of those who did evil was the worst [consequence]
because they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule 
them.
11.
allah begins creation; then he will repeat it; then to him you 
will be returned.
12.
and the day the hour appears the criminals will be in despair.
13.
and there will not be for them among their [alleged] partners 
any intercessors, and they will [then] be disbelievers in their 
partners.
14.
and the day the hour appears – that day they will become 
separated.
15.
and as for those who had believed and done righteous deeds, 
they will be in a garden [of paradise], delighted.
16.
but as for those who disbelieved and denied our verses and 
the meeting of the hereafter, those will be brought into the 
punishment [to remain].
17.
so exalted is allah when you reach the evening and when you 
reach the morning.
18.
and to him is [due all] praise throughout the heavens and the 
earth.  and [exalted is he] at night and when you are at noon.
19.
he brings the living out of the dead and brings the dead out of 
the living and brings to life the earth after its lifelessness.  
and thus will you be brought out.1069
20.
and of his signs is that he created you from dust; then, 
suddenly you were human beings dispersing [throughout the 
earth].
21.
and of his signs is that he created for you from yourselves 
mates that you may find tranquility in them; and he placed 
between you affection and mercy.  indeed in that are signs for 
a people who give thought.
                                               
1069of the graves or out of the earth at the time of resurrection.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
395
22.
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth 
and the diversity of your languages and your colors.  indeed in 
that are signs for those of knowledge.
23.
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day and your 
seeking of his bounty.  indeed in that are signs for a people 
who listen.
24.
and of his signs is [that] he shows you the lightening [causing]
fear and aspiration, and he sends down rain from the sky by 
which he brings to life the earth after its lifelessness.  indeed 
in that are signs for a people who use reason.
25.
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand [i.e., remain]
by his command.  then when he calls you with a [single] call 
from the earth, immediately you will come forth.
26.
and to him belongs whoever is in the heavens and earth.  all 
are to him devoutly obedient.
27.
and it is he who begins creation; then he repeats it, and that is 
[even] easier for him.  to him belongs the highest description
[i.e., attribute] in the heavens and earth.  and he is the exalted
in might, the wise.
28.
he presents to you an example from yourselves.  do you have 
among those whom your right hands possess [i.e., slaves] any 
partners in what we have provided for you so that you are equal
therein [and] would fear them as your fear of one another 
[within a partnership]?1070  thus do we detail the verses for a 
people who use reason.
29.
but those who wrong follow their [own] desires without 
knowledge.  then who can guide one whom allah has sent 
astray?  and for them there are no helpers.
30.
so direct your face [i.e., self] toward the religion, inclining to 
truth.  [adhere to] the fitrah1071 of allah upon which he has 
created [all] people.  no change should there be in the creation
                                               
1070see footnote to 16:71.
1071the natural inborn inclination of man to worship his creator prior to the 
corruption of his nature by external influences.  thus, islamic monotheism
is described as the religion of fitrah – that of the inherent nature of mankind.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
396
of allah.1072  that is the correct religion, but most of the 
people do not know.
31.
[adhere to it], turning in repentance to him, and fear him and 
establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others 
with allah
32.
[or] of those who have divided their religion and become sects,
every faction rejoicing in what it has.1073
33.
and when adversity touches the people, they call upon their 
lord, turning in repentance to him.  then when he lets them 
taste mercy from him, at once a party of them associate others 
with their lord,
34.
so that they will deny what we have granted them.1074  then 
enjoy yourselves, for you are going to know.
35.
or have we sent down to them an authority [i.e., a proof or 
scripture], and it speaks of what they have been associating 
with him?
36.
and when we let the people taste mercy, they rejoice therein, 
but if evil afflicts them for what their hands have put forth, 
immediately they despair.
37.
do they not see that allah extends provision for whom he 
wills and restricts [it]?  indeed in that are signs for a people 
who believe.
38.
so give the relative his right, as well as the needy and the traveler.  
that is best for those who desire the countenance of allah, and
it is they who will be the successful.
39.
and whatever you give for interest [i.e., advantage] to increase
within the wealth of people1075 will not increase with allah.  
                                               
1072i.e., let people remain true to their fitrah within the religion of islam.
1073of beliefs, opinions, customs, etc.
1074or "so let them deny what we have granted them."
1075the phrase includes several connotations, among them:  a) that which is 
given as usury or interest, b) that which is given on the condition that it 
be repaid with interest, and c) a gift given with the intention of obtaining
from the recipient greater benefit or a larger gift.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
397
but what you give in zakah,1076 desiring the countenance of 
allah – those are the multipliers.1077
40.
allah is the one who created you, then provided for you, then 
will cause you to die, and then will give you life.  are there 
any of your "partners" who does anything of that?  exalted is 
he and high above what they associate with him.
41.
corruption has appeared throughout the land and sea by [reason 
of] what the hands of people have earned so he [i.e., allah] 
may let them taste part of [the consequence of] what they have 
done that perhaps they will return [to righteousness].
42.
say, [o muhammad], "travel through the land and observe how
was the end of those before.  most of them were associators 
[of others with allah].
43.
so direct your face [i.e., self] toward the correct religion before
a day comes from allah of which there is no repelling.  that 
day, they will be divided.1078
44.
whoever disbelieves – upon him is [the consequence of] his 
disbelief.  and whoever does righteousness – they are for 
themselves preparing,
45.
that he may reward those who have believed and done 
righteous deeds out of his bounty.  indeed, he does not like 
the disbelievers.
46.
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bringers of 
good tidings and to let you taste his mercy [i.e., rain] and so 
the ships may sail at his command and so you may seek of 
his bounty, and perhaps you will be grateful.
47.
and we have already sent messengers before you to their peoples,
and they came to them with clear evidences; then we took 
retribution from those who committed crimes, and incumbent 
upon us was support1079 of the believers.
                                               
1076the meaning of sadaqah (voluntary charity) is included here.
1077of their blessings on earth and their rewards in the hereafter.
1078into those destined for paradise and those destined for hell.
1079i.e., aid or the bestowal of victory.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
398
48.
it is allah who sends the winds, and they stir the clouds and 
spread them in the sky however he wills, and he makes them 
fragments so you see the rain emerge from within them.  and 
when he causes it to fall upon whom he wills of his servants, 
immediately they rejoice
49.
although they were, before it was sent down upon them –
before that, in despair.
50.
so observe the effects of the mercy of allah – how he gives 
life to the earth after its lifelessness.  indeed, that [same one] 
will give life to the dead, and he is over all things competent.
51.
but if we should send a [bad] wind and they saw [their crops] 
turned yellow, they would remain thereafter disbelievers.1080
52.
so indeed, you will not make the dead hear, nor will you make
the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs, retreating.
53.
and you cannot guide the blind away from their error.  you will
only make hear those who believe in our verses so they are 
muslims [in submission to allah].
54.
allah is the one who created you from weakness, then made 
after weakness strength, then made after strength weakness 
and white hair.  he creates what he wills, and he is the knowing,
the competent.
55.
and the day the hour appears the criminals will swear they 
had remained but an hour.  thus they were deluded.
56.
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say, "you 
remained the extent of allah's decree until the day of 
resurrection, and this is the day of resurrection, but you did 
not used to know."1081
57.
so that day, their excuse will not benefit those who wronged, 
nor will they be asked to appease [allah].
58.
and we have certainly presented to the people in this quran 
                                               
1080denying and ungrateful for the previous favors of allah.
1081i.e., acknowledge the truth.

surah 30 – ar-rum
juz 21
399
from every [kind of] example.  but, [o muhammad], if you 
should bring them a sign, the disbelievers will surely say, 
"you [believers] are but falsifiers."
59.
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know.1082
60.
so be patient.  indeed, the promise of allah is truth.  and let 
them not disquiet you who are not certain [in faith].
                                               
1082i.e., those who do not wish to know the truth and refuse it.


juz 21
400

1083
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
alif, lam, meem.1084
2.
these are verses of the wise1085 book,
3.
as guidance and mercy for the doers of good
4.
who establish prayer and give zakah, and they, of the hereafter,
are certain [in faith].
5.
those are on [right] guidance from their lord, and it is those 
who are the successful.
6.
and of the people is he who buys the amusement of speech1086
to mislead [others] from the way of allah without knowledge 
and who takes it [i.e., his way] in ridicule.  those will have a 
humiliating punishment.
7.
and when our verses are recited to him, he turns away arrogantly
as if he had not heard them, as if there was in his ears deafness.  
so give him tidings of a painful punishment.
8.
indeed, those who believe and do righteous deeds – for them 
are the gardens of pleasure,
9.
wherein they abide eternally; [it is] the promise of allah 
[which is] truth.  and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
10.
he created the heavens without pillars that you see and has 
cast into the earth firmly set mountains, lest it should shift 
                                               
1083luqman:  luqman, the wise, whose learning and wisdom was known 
among pre-islamic arabs.  he was said to have been an abyssinian or 
nubian slave who lived in the area of madyan and thus knew arabic.
1084see footnote to 2:1.
1085see footnote to 10:1.
1086i.e., that which has no benefit.  described by different sahabah as shirk
(association with allah), misleading stories, frivolous songs, or music 
but includes all which distracts or diverts one from the quran and 
remembrance of allah.


juz 21
401
with you, and dispersed therein from every creature.  and we 
sent down rain from the sky and made grow therein [plants] of 
every noble kind.
11.
this is the creation of allah.  so show me what those other than
him have created.  rather, the wrongdoers are in clear error.
12.
and we had certainly given luqman wisdom [and said], "be 
grateful to allah."  and whoever is grateful is grateful for [the 
benefit of] himself.  and whoever denies [his favor] – then 
indeed, allah is free of need and praiseworthy.
13.
and [mention, o muhammad], when luqman said to his son 
while he was instructing him, "o my son, do not associate 
[anything] with allah.  indeed, association [with him] is great 
injustice."
14.
and we have enjoined upon man [care] for his parents.  his
mother carried him, [increasing her] in weakness upon weakness,
and his weaning is in two years.  be grateful to me and to 
your parents; to me is the [final] destination.
15.
but if they endeavor to make you associate with me that of 
which you have no knowledge,1087 do not obey them but 
accompany them in [this] world with appropriate kindness and 
follow the way of those who turn back to me [in repentance].  
then to me will be your return, and i will inform you about 
what you used to do.
16.
[and luqman said], "o my son, indeed if it [i.e., a wrong] 
should be the weight of a mustard seed and should be within a 
rock or [anywhere] in the heavens or in the earth, allah will 
bring it forth.  indeed, allah is subtle and acquainted.
17.
o my son, establish prayer, enjoin what is right, forbid what is 
wrong, and be patient over what befalls you.  indeed, [all] that 
is of the matters [requiring] resolve.1088
                                               
1087see footnote to 29:8.
1088for the reason that they are enjoined by allah.


juz 21
402
18.
and do not turn your cheek [in contempt] toward people1089
and do not walk through the earth exultantly.  indeed, allah 
does not like everyone self-deluded and boastful.
19.
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice; indeed, 
the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys."
20.
do you not see that allah has made subject to you whatever is 
in the heavens and whatever is in the earth and amply bestowed
upon you his favors, [both] apparent and unapparent?  but of 
the people is he who disputes about allah without knowledge 
or guidance or an enlightening book [from him].
21.
and when it is said to them, "follow what allah has revealed,"
they say, "rather, we will follow that upon which we found our
fathers."  even if satan was inviting them to the punishment 
of the blaze?
22.
and whoever submits his face [i.e., self] to allah while he is a 
doer of good – then he has grasped the most trustworthy 
handhold.  and to allah will be the outcome of [all] matters.
23.
and whoever has disbelieved – let not his disbelief grieve you.  
to us is their return, and we will inform them of what they 
did.  indeed, allah is knowing of that within the breasts.
24.
we grant them enjoyment for a little; then we will force them 
to a massive punishment.
25.
and if you asked them, "who created the heavens and earth?" 
they would surely say, "allah."  say, "[all] praise is [due] to 
allah"; but most of them do not know.
26.
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and earth.  indeed,
allah is the free of need, the praiseworthy.
27.
and if whatever trees upon the earth were pens and the sea 
[was ink], replenished thereafter by seven [more] seas, the 
words1090 of allah would not be exhausted.  indeed, allah is 
exalted in might and wise.
                                               
1089rather, respect them by directing your face and attention to them.
1090see footnote to 18:109.


juz 21
403
28.
your creation and your resurrection will not be but as that of a 
single soul.1091  indeed, allah is hearing and seeing.
29.
do you not see [i.e., know] that allah causes the night to enter 
the day and causes the day to enter the night and has subjected 
the sun and the moon, each running [its course] for a specified 
term, and that allah, with whatever you do, is acquainted?
30.
that is because allah is the truth, and that what they call 
upon other than him is falsehood, and because allah is the 
most high, the grand.
31.
do you not see that ships sail through the sea by the favor of 
allah that he may show you of his signs?  indeed in that are 
signs for everyone patient and grateful.
32.
and when waves come over them like canopies, they supplicate
allah, sincere to him in religion [i.e., faith].  but when he 
delivers them to the land, there are [some] of them who are 
moderate [in faith].  and none rejects our signs except 
everyone treacherous and ungrateful.
33.
o mankind, fear your lord and fear a day when no father will 
avail his son, nor will a son avail his father at all.  indeed, the 
promise of allah is truth, so let not the worldly life delude you 
and be not deceived about allah by the deceiver [i.e., satan].
34.
indeed, allah [alone] has knowledge of the hour and sends 
down the rain and knows what is in the wombs.1092  and no 
soul perceives what it will earn tomorrow, and no soul 
perceives in what land it will die.  indeed, allah is knowing 
and acquainted.
                                               
1091the re-creation and resurrection of one or of all is accomplished with 
equal ease by allah (subhanahu wa taala).
1092i.e., every aspect of the fetus' present and future existence.

surah 32 – as-sajdah
juz 21
404
surah as-sajdah
1093
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
alif, lam, meem.1094
2.
[this is] the revelation of the book about which there is no 
doubt from the lord of the worlds.
3.
or do they say, "he invented it"?  rather, it is the truth from 
your lord, [o muhammad], that you may warn a people to 
whom no warner has come before you [so] perhaps they will 
be guided.
4.
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and whatever 
is between them in six days; then he established himself above
the throne.1095  you have not besides him any protector or 
any intercessor; so will you not be reminded?
5.
he arranges [each] matter from the heaven to the earth; then it 
will ascend to him in a day, the extent of which is a thousand 
years of those which you count.
6.
that is the knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the exalted
in might, the merciful,
7.
who perfected everything which he created and began the 
creation of man from clay.
8.
then he made his posterity out of the extract of a liquid 
disdained.
9.
then he proportioned him and breathed into him from his 
[created] soul1096 and made for you hearing and vision and 
hearts [i.e., intellect]; little are you grateful.
10.
and they say, "when we are lost [i.e., disintegrated] within the 
earth, will we indeed be [recreated] in a new creation?"  rather,
they are, in the meeting with their lord, disbelievers.
                                               
1093as-sajdah:  prostration.
1094see footnote to 2:1.
1095see footnote to 2:19.
1096i.e., element of life.  see footnote to 15:29.

surah 32 – as-sajdah
juz 21
405
11.
say, "the angel of death will take you who has been entrusted 
with you.  then to your lord you will be returned."
12.
if you could but see when the criminals are hanging their heads
before their lord, [saying], "our lord, we have seen and heard,
so return us [to the world]; we will work righteousness.  indeed,
we are [now] certain."
13.
and if we had willed, we could have given every soul its 
guidance, but the word1097 from me will come into effect [that]
"i will surely fill hell with jinn and people all together.
14.
so taste [punishment] because you forgot the meeting of this, 
your day; indeed, we have [accordingly] forgotten you.  and 
taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do."
15.
only those believe in our verses who, when they are reminded
by them, fall down in prostration and exalt [allah] with praise 
of their lord, and they are not arrogant.
16.
their sides part [i.e., they arise] from [their] beds; they 
supplicate their lord in fear and aspiration, and from what we 
have provided them, they spend.1098
17.
and no soul knows what has been hidden for them of comfort 
for eyes [i.e., satisfaction] as reward for what they used to do.
18.
then is one who was a believer like one who was defiantly 
disobedient?  they are not equal.
19.
as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, for them 
will be the gardens of refuge as accommodation for what 
they used to do.
20.
but as for those who defiantly disobeyed, their refuge is the fire.  
every time they wish to emerge from it, they will be returned 
to it while it is said to them, "taste the punishment of the fire 
which you used to deny."
21.
and we will surely let them taste the nearer punishment1099
                                               
1097deserved by the evildoers.
1098in the cause of allah.
1099i.e., the disasters and calamities of this world.

surah 32 – as-sajdah
juz 21
406
short of the greater punishment that perhaps they will return 
[i.e., repent].
22.
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the verses 
of his lord; then he turns away from them?  indeed we, from
the criminals, will take retribution.
23.
and we certainly gave moses the scripture, so do not be in 
doubt over his meeting.1100  and we made it [i.e., the torah] 
guidance for the children of israel.
24.
and we made from among them leaders guiding by our 
command when they were patient and [when] they were certain
of our signs.
25.
indeed, your lord will judge between them on the day of 
resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ.
26.
has it not become clear to them how many generations we 
destroyed before them, [as] they walk among their dwellings?  
indeed in that are signs; then do they not hear?
27.
have they not seen that we drive water [in clouds] to barren 
land and bring forth thereby crops from which their livestock 
eat and [they] themselves?  then do they not see?
28.
and they say, "when will be this conquest,1101 if you should 
be truthful?"
29.
say, [o muhammad], "on the day of conquest the belief of 
those who had disbelieved will not benefit them, nor will they 
be reprieved."
30.
so turn away from them and wait.  indeed, they are waiting.
                                               
1100i.e., muhammad's meeting moses on the night of al-miraj (ascent).
1101or "decision," i.e., judgement.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 21
407
surah al-ahzab
1102
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o prophet, fear allah and do not obey the disbelievers and the 
hypocrites.  indeed, allah is ever knowing and wise.
2. and follow that which is revealed to you from your lord.  indeed
allah is ever, with what you do, acquainted.
3. and rely upon allah; and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs.
4. allah has not made for a man two hearts in his interior.  and he 
has not made your wives whom you declare unlawful1103 your 
mothers.  and he has not made your claimed [i.e., adopted] 
sons your [true] sons.  that is [merely] your saying by your mouths,
but allah says the truth, and he guides to the [right] way.
5. call them1104 by [the names of] their fathers; it is more just in 
the sight of allah.  but if you do not know their fathers – then
they are [still] your brothers in religion and those entrusted to you.  
and there is no blame upon you for that in which you have erred
but [only for] what your hearts intended.  and ever is allah 
forgiving and merciful.
6. the prophet is more worthy of the believers than themselves,1105
and his wives are [in the position of] their mothers.  and those 
of [blood] relationship are more entitled [to inheritance] in the 
decree of allah than the [other] believers and the emigrants, 
except that you may do to your close associates a kindness 
[through bequest].  that was in the book1106 inscribed.
                                               
1102al-ahzab:  the companies or the combined forces, referring to the 
alliance of disbelieving arab tribes against the muslims in madinah for 
the battle called "al-ahzab" or "al-khandaq" (the trench).
1103by the expression "you are to me like the back of my mother."  such an 
oath taken against approaching one's wife was a pre-islamic practice 
declared by allah (subhanahu wa taala) to be a sin requiring expiation 
as described in 58:3-4.
1104those children under your care.
1105he () is more worthy of their obedience and loyalty and is more 
concerned for them than they are for one another.
1106the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth).

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 21
408
7.
and [mention, o muhammad], when we took from the prophets
their covenant and from you and from noah and ibrahim and 
moses and jesus, the son of mary; and we took from them a 
solemn covenant
8.
that he may question the truthful about their truth.1107  and 
he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment.
9.
o you who have believed, remember the favor of allah upon 
you when armies came to [attack] you and we sent upon them 
a wind and armies [of angels] you did not see.  and ever is allah,
of what you do, seeing.
10.
[remember] when they came at you from above you and from 
below you, and when eyes shifted [in fear], and hearts reached 
the throats, and you assumed about allah [various] assumptions.
11.
there the believers were tested and shaken with a severe 
shaking.
12.
and [remember] when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts
is disease said, "allah and his messenger did not promise us 
except delusion,"
13.
and when a faction of them said, "o people of yathrib,1108
there is no stability for you [here], so return [home]."  and a 
party of them asked permission of the prophet, saying, "indeed,
our houses are exposed [i.e., unprotected]," while they were 
not exposed.  they did not intend except to flee.
14.
and if they had been entered upon from all its [surrounding] 
regions and fitnah [i.e., disbelief] had been demanded of them, 
they would have done it and not hesitated over it except briefly.
15.
and they had already promised allah before not to turn their 
                                               
1107i.e., that he may ask the prophets what they conveyed to their people 
and what response they received.  "the truthful" may also refer to those 
who believed in the message conveyed by the prophets and imparted it 
to others.
1108the name by which al-madinah was known before the arrival of the 
prophet ().

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 21
409
backs [i.e., flee].  and ever is the promise to allah [that about 
which one will be] questioned.
16.
say, [o muhammad], "never will fleeing benefit you if you 
should flee from death or killing; and then [if you did], you 
would not be given enjoyment [of life] except for a little."
17.
say, "who is it that can protect you from allah1109 if he 
intends for you an ill or intends for you a mercy?"  and they 
will not find for themselves besides allah any protector or any 
helper.
18.
already allah knows the hinderers1110 among you and those 
[hypocrites] who say to their brothers, "come to us,"1111 and 
do not go to battle, except for a few,1112
19.
indisposed1113 toward you.  and when fear comes, you see them
looking at you, their eyes revolving like one being overcome by
death.  but when fear departs, they lash you with sharp tongues,
indisposed toward [any] good.  those have not believed, so 
allah has rendered their deeds worthless, and ever is that, for 
allah, easy.
20.
they think the companies have not [yet] withdrawn.1114  and 
if the companies should come [again], they would wish they 
were in the desert among the bedouins, inquiring [from afar] 
about your news.  and if they should be among you, they would
not fight except for a little.
21.
there has certainly been for you in the messenger of allah an 
excellent pattern1115 for anyone whose hope is in allah and the 
last day and [who] remembers allah often.
                                               
1109i.e., prevent the will of allah from being carried out.
1110those who dissuade others from supporting the prophet () in battle.
1111rather than joining the prophet ().
1112who went out of ulterior motives.
1113literally, "stingy," i.e., unwilling to offer any help.
1114in their excessive fear the cowardly hypocrites could not believe the 
enemy forces had been defeated.
1115an example to be followed.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 21
410
22.
and when the believers saw the companies, they said, "this is 
what allah and his messenger had promised us, and allah 
and his messenger spoke the truth."  and it increased them 
only in faith and acceptance.
23.
among the believers are men true to what they promised allah.  
among them is he who has fulfilled his vow [to the death], 
and among them is he who awaits [his chance].  and they did 
not alter [the terms of their commitment] by any alteration –
24.
that allah may reward the truthful for their truth and punish 
the hypocrites if he wills or accept their repentance.  indeed, 
allah is ever forgiving and merciful.
25.
and allah repelled those who disbelieved, in their rage, not 
having obtained any good.  and sufficient was allah for the 
believers in battle, and ever is allah powerful and exalted in 
might.
26.
and he brought down those who supported them among the 
people of the scripture1116 from their fortresses and cast terror 
into their hearts [so that] a party [i.e., their men] you killed, 
and you took captive a party [i.e., the women and children].
27.
and he caused you to inherit their land and their homes and 
their properties and a land which you have not trodden.1117  
and ever is allah, over all things, competent.
28.
o prophet, say to your wives, "if you should desire the worldly
life and its adornment, then come, i will provide for you and 
give you a gracious release.
29.
but if you should desire allah and his messenger and the 
home of the hereafter – then indeed, allah has prepared for 
the doers of good among you a great reward."
30.
o wives of the prophet, whoever of you should commit a clear
immorality – for her the punishment would be doubled two fold,
and ever is that, for allah, easy.
                                               
1116the jews of banu quraythah, who had violated their treaty with the muslims.
1117i.e., that taken in subsequent conquests.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
411
31.
and whoever of you devoutly obeys allah and his messenger 
and does righteousness – we will give her her reward twice; 
and we have prepared for her a noble provision.
32.
o wives of the prophet, you are not like anyone among women.  
if you fear allah, then do not be soft in speech [to men],1118
lest he in whose heart is disease should covet, but speak with 
appropriate speech.
33.
and abide in your houses and do not display yourselves as 
[was] the display of the former times of ignorance. and establish
prayer and give zakah and obey allah and his messenger.  
allah intends only to remove from you the impurity [of sin], 
o people of the [prophet's] household, and to purify you with 
[extensive] purification.
34.
and remember what is recited in your houses of the verses of 
allah and wisdom.1119  indeed, allah is ever subtle and 
acquainted [with all things].
35.
indeed, the muslim men and muslim women, the believing men 
and believing women, the obedient men and obedient women,
the truthful men and truthful women, the patient men and patient
women, the humble men and humble women, the charitable men
and charitable women, the fasting men and fasting women, the 
men who guard their private parts and the women who do so, 
and the men who remember allah often and the women who 
do so – for them allah has prepared forgiveness and a great 
reward.
36.
it is not for a believing man or a believing woman, when allah
and his messenger have decided a matter, that they should 
[thereafter] have any choice about their affair.  and whoever 
disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into 
clear error.
                                               
1118the meaning has also been given as "you are not like any among 
women if you fear allah.  so do not be soft in speech..."
1119the teachings of the prophet () or his sunnah.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
412
37.
and [remember, o muhammad], when you said to the one on 
whom allah bestowed favor and you bestowed favor,1120
"keep your wife and fear allah," while you concealed within 
yourself that which allah is to disclose.1121  and you feared 
the people,1122 while allah has more right that you fear him.1123  
so when zayd had no longer any need for her, we married her 
to you in order that there not be upon the believers any 
discomfort [i.e., guilt] concerning the wives of their claimed 
[i.e., adopted] sons when they no longer have need of them.  
and ever is the command [i.e., decree] of allah accomplished.
38.
there is not to be upon the prophet any discomfort concerning 
that which allah has imposed upon him.1124  [this is] the 
established way of allah with those [prophets] who have passed
on before.  and ever is the command of allah a destiny decreed.
39.
[allah praises] those who convey the messages of allah1125
and fear him and do not fear anyone but allah.  and sufficient
is allah as accountant.
40.
muhammad is not the father of [any] one of your men, but [he 
is] the messenger of allah and seal [i.e., last] of the prophets.  
and ever is allah, of all things, knowing.
41.
o you who have believed, remember allah with much 
remembrance
42.
and exalt him morning and afternoon.
                                               
1120referring to the prophet's freed slave, zayd bin harithah.
1121i.e., allah's command to the prophet () to marry zaynab after zayd 
divorced her.  this was to demonstrate that a man may marry a woman 
formerly married to his adopted son.
1122i.e., feared their saying that the prophet () had married the (former) 
wife of his son (which is prohibited by allah in the case of a true, 
begotten son).
1123by making known his command.
1124or permitted to him.
1125i.e., the prophets (peace be upon them all) and after them, the followers 
of the final prophet, muhammad (), who honestly convey allah's 
message to the people.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
413
43.
it is he who confers blessing upon you,1126 and his angels 
[ask him to do so] that he may bring you out from darknesses 
into the light.  and ever is he, to the believers, merciful.
44.
their greeting the day they meet him will be, "peace."  and 
he has prepared for them a noble reward.
45.
o prophet, indeed we have sent you as a witness and a 
bringer of good tidings and a warner
46.
and one who invites to allah, by his permission, and an 
illuminating lamp.
47.
and give good tidings to the believers that they will have 
from allah great bounty.
48.
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites but do not 
harm them, and rely upon allah.  and sufficient is allah as 
disposer of affairs.
49.
o you who have believed, when you marry believing women 
and then divorce them before you have touched them [i.e., 
consummated the marriage], then there is not for you any 
waiting period to count concerning them.  so provide for them 
and give them a gracious release.
50.
o prophet, indeed we have made lawful to you your wives to 
whom you have given their due compensation1127 and those 
your right hand possesses from what allah has returned to you 
[of captives] and the daughters of your paternal uncles and the 
daughters of your paternal aunts and the daughters of your 
maternal uncles and the daughters of your maternal aunts who 
emigrated with you and a believing woman if she gives 
herself to the prophet [and] if the prophet wishes to marry her; 
[this is] only for you, excluding the [other] believers.  we 
certainly know what we have made obligatory upon them 
                                               
1126i.e., allah (subhanahu wa taala) cares for you and covers you with his 
mercy.  an additional meaning is that he praises you in the presence of 
the angels.
1127i.e., bridal gifts (mahr).

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
414
concerning their wives and those their right hands possess, 
[but this is for you] in order that there will be upon you no 
discomfort [i.e., difficulty].  and ever is allah forgiving and 
merciful.
51.
you, [o muhammad], may put aside whom you will of them1128
or take to yourself whom you will.  and any that you desire of 
those [wives] from whom you had [temporarily] separated –
there is no blame upon you [in returning her].  that is more 
suitable that they should be content and not grieve and that 
they should be satisfied with what you have given them – all 
of them.  and allah knows what is in your hearts.  and ever 
is allah knowing and forbearing.
52.
not lawful to you, [o muhammad], are [any additional] women
after [this], nor [is it] for you to exchange them for [other] wives,
even if their beauty were to please you, except what your right
hand possesses.  and ever is allah, over all things, an observer.
53.
o you who have believed, do not enter the houses of the prophet
except when you are permitted for a meal, without awaiting its 
readiness.  but when you are invited, then enter; and when you
have eaten, disperse without seeking to remain for conversation.  
indeed, that [behavior] was troubling the prophet, and he is 
shy of [dismissing] you.  but allah is not shy of the truth.  
and when you ask [his wives] for something, ask them from 
behind a partition.  that is purer for your hearts and their 
hearts.  and it is not [conceivable or lawful] for you to harm 
the messenger of allah or to marry his wives after him, ever.  
indeed, that would be in the sight of allah an enormity.
54.
whether you reveal a thing or conceal it, indeed allah is ever, 
of all things, knowing.
55.
there is no blame upon them [i.e., women] concerning their 
fathers or their sons or their brothers or their brothers' sons or 
                                               
1128those mentioned in the previous verse as being lawful to the prophet () 
or his wives to which he was married.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
415
their sisters' sons or their women or those their right hands 
possess [i.e., slaves].1129  and fear allah.  indeed allah is ever,
over all things, witness.
56.
indeed, allah confers blessing upon the prophet, and his angels
[ask him to do so].  o you who have believed, ask [allah to 
confer] blessing upon him and ask [allah to grant him] peace.
57.
indeed, those who abuse allah and his messenger – allah has 
cursed them in this world and the hereafter and prepared for 
them a humiliating punishment.
58.
and those who harm believing men and believing women for 
[something] other than what they have earned [i.e., deserved] 
have certainly born upon themselves a slander and manifest sin.
59.
o prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women 
of the believers to bring down over themselves [part] of their 
outer garments.1130  that is more suitable that they will be 
known1131 and not be abused.  and ever is allah forgiving 
and merciful.1132
60.
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is disease1133 and 
those who spread rumors in al-madinah do not cease, we will 
surely incite you against them; then they will not remain your 
neighbors therein except for a little,
61.
accursed wherever they are found, [being] seized and massacred
completely.
62.
[this is] the established way of allah with those who passed on 
before; and you will not find in the way of allah any change.
                                               
1129it is permissible for a woman to appear before these people without 
complete covering and to be alone with them.  the brothers of both 
parents (uncles) are included as "fathers" or "parents," according to hadith.
1130the jilbab, which is defined as a cloak covering the head and reaching 
to the ground, thereby covering the woman's entire body.
1131as chaste believing women.
1132or "and allah was forgiving and merciful" of what occurred before this 
injunction or before knowledge of it.
1133referring here to those who commit adultery or fornication.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
416
63.
people ask you concerning the hour.  say, "knowledge of it is 
only with allah.  and what may make you perceive?  perhaps
the hour is near."
64.
indeed, allah has cursed the disbelievers and prepared for them
a blaze.
65.
abiding therein forever, they will not find a protector or a 
helper.
66.
the day their faces will be turned about in the fire, they will say,
"how we wish we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger."
67.
and they will say, "our lord, indeed we obeyed our masters and
our dignitaries,1134 and they led us astray from the [right] way.
68.
our lord, give them double the punishment and curse them 
with a great curse."
69.
o you who have believed, be not like those who abused moses;
then allah cleared him of what they said.  and he, in the sight 
of allah, was distinguished.
70.
o you who have believed, fear allah and speak words of 
appropriate justice.
71.
he will [then] amend for you your deeds and forgive you your 
sins.  and whoever obeys allah and his messenger has certainly
attained a great attainment.
72.
indeed, we offered the trust1135 to the heavens and the earth 
and the mountains, and they declined to bear it and feared it; 
but man [undertook to] bear it.  indeed, he was unjust and 
ignorant.1136
73.
[it1137 was] so that allah may punish the hypocrite men and 
                                               
1134also interpreted to mean "our noble ones and our elders [i.e., distinguished
scholars]."
1135the acceptance of obligations and obedience to allah.
1136coveting its reward while forgetting the penalty for failure to keep his 
commitment.
1137the reason for which mankind was permitted to carry the trust.

surah 33 – al-ahzab
juz 22
417
hypocrite women and the men and women who associate 
others with him and that allah may accept repentance from 
the believing men and believing women.  and ever is allah 
forgiving and merciful.


juz 22
418

1138
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. [all] praise is [due] to allah, to whom belongs whatever is in 
the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and to him belongs [all]
praise in the hereafter.  and he is the wise, the acquainted.
2. he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from 
it and what descends from the heaven and what ascends therein.  
and he is the merciful, the forgiving.
3. but those who disbelieve say, "the hour will not come to us."  
say, "yes, by my lord, it will surely come to you.  [allah is] 
the knower of the unseen."  not absent from him is an atom's 
weight1139 within the heavens or within the earth or [what is] 
smaller than that or greater, except that it is in a clear register –
4. that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds.   
those will have forgiveness and noble provision.
5. but those who strive against our verses [seeking] to cause 
failure1140 – for them will be a painful punishment of foul 
nature.
6. and those who have been given knowledge see that what is 
revealed to you from your lord is the truth, and it guides to the
path of the exalted in might, the praiseworthy.
7. but those who disbelieve say, "shall we direct you to a man 
who will inform you [that] when you have disintegrated in 
complete disintegration, you will [then] be [recreated] in a new 
creation?
8. has he invented about allah a lie or is there in him madness?"  
rather, they who do not believe in the hereafter will be in the 
punishment and [are in] extreme error.
                                               
1138saba:  (the people of) saba or sabeans.
1139or "the weight of a small ant."
1140i.e., to undermine their credibility in order to defeat the prophet ().


juz 22
419
9.
then, do they not look at what is before them and what is 
behind them of the heaven and earth?  if we should will, we 
could cause the earth to swallow them or [could] let fall upon 
them fragments from the sky.  indeed in that is a sign for 
every servant turning back [to allah].
10.
and we certainly gave david from us bounty.  [we said], "o 
mountains, repeat [our] praises with him, and the birds [as 
well]."  and we made pliable for him iron,
11.
[commanding him], "make full coats of mail and calculate 
[precisely] the links, and work [all of you] righteousness.  
indeed i, of what you do, am seeing."
12.
and to solomon [we subjected] the wind – its morning 
[journey was that of] a month – and its afternoon [journey was 
that of] a month, and we made flow for him a spring of 
[liquid] copper.  and among the jinn were those who worked 
for him by the permission of his lord.  and whoever deviated 
among them from our command – we will make him taste of 
the punishment of the blaze.
13.
they made for him what he willed of elevated chambers,1141
statues,1142 bowls like reservoirs, and stationary kettles.  [we 
said], "work, o family of david, in gratitude."  and few of 
my servants are grateful.
14.
and when we decreed for him [i.e., solomon] death, nothing 
indicated to them [i.e., the jinn] his death except a creature of 
the earth eating his staff.1143  but when he fell, it became clear 
to the jinn that if they had known the unseen, they would not 
have remained in humiliating punishment.1144
15.
there was for [the tribe of] saba in their dwelling place a sign:  
                                               
1141described by commentators as palaces, dwellings, or places of prayer.
1142which were not prohibited until the time of prophet muhammad ().
1143upon which he was leaning at the time of his death.  a termite continued
to gnaw into the stick until it collapsed under his weight.
1144i.e., hard labor.  this verse is evidence that the jinn do not possess knowledge
of the unseen, which belongs exclusively to allah (subhanahu wa taala).


juz 22
420
two [fields of] gardens on the right and on the left.  [they were
told], "eat from the provisions of your lord and be grateful to 
him.  a good land [have you], and a forgiving lord."
16.
but they turned away [refusing], so we sent upon them the 
flood of the dam,1145 and we replaced their two [fields of] 
gardens with gardens of bitter fruit, tamarisks and something 
of sparse lote trees.
17.
[by] that we repaid them because they disbelieved.  and do 
we [thus] repay except the ungrateful?
18.
and we placed between them and the cities which we had 
blessed1146 [many] visible cities. and we determined between 
them the [distances of] journey,1147 [saying], "travel between 
them by night or by day in safety."
19.
but [insolently] they said, "our lord, lengthen the distance 
between our journeys," and wronged themselves, so we made 
them narrations1148 and dispersed them in total dispersion.  
indeed in that are signs for everyone patient and grateful.
20.
and iblees had already confirmed through them1149 his 
assumption,1150 so they followed him, except for a party of 
believers.
21.
and he had over them no authority except [it was decreed] that 
we might make evident who believes in the hereafter from who 
is thereof in doubt.  and your lord, over all things, is guardian.
22.
say, [o muhammad], "invoke those you claim [as deities] 
besides allah."  they do not possess an atom's weight [of 
ability] in the heavens or on the earth, and they do not have 
                                               
1145i.e., caused by a break in their dam.  another meaning is "the overwhelming
flood."
1146in the lands of what is now southern syria and palestine.
1147i.e., we placed the intermediate settlements at calculated distances for 
the convenience of travelers.
1148stories related to others as lessons or examples.
1149i.e., the people of saba or mankind in general.
1150that mankind could readily be misled by him.


juz 22
421
therein any partnership [with him], nor is there for him from 
among them any assistant.
23.
and intercession does not benefit with him except for one 
whom he permits.  [and those wait] until, when terror is 
removed from their hearts,1151 they will say [to one another], 
"what has your lord said?"  they will say, "the truth."  and 
he is the most high, the grand.
24.
say, "who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?"  
say, "allah.  and indeed, we or you are either upon guidance 
or in clear error."
25.
say, "you will not be asked about what we committed, and 
we will not be asked about what you do."
26.
say, "our lord will bring us together; then he will judge 
between us in truth.  and he is the knowing judge."
27.
say, "show me those whom you have attached to him as partners.  
no!  rather, he [alone] is allah, the exalted in might, the wise."
28.
and we have not sent you except comprehensively1152 to 
mankind as a bringer of good tidings and a warner.  but most 
of the people do not know.
29.
and they say, "when is this promise, if you should be truthful?"
30.
say, "for you is the appointment of a day [when] you will not 
remain thereafter an hour, nor will you precede [it]."
31.
and those who disbelieve say, "we will never believe in this 
quran nor in that before it."  but if you could see when the 
wrongdoers are made to stand before their lord, refuting each 
others' words...1153  those who were oppressed will say to 
those who were arrogant, "if not for you, we would have been 
believers."
                                               
1151i.e., the hearts of the angels who will be permitted to intercede.
1152literally, "inclusively, without exception."
1153having been left to the imagination, the conclusion of this sentence is 
estimated to be "...you would see a dreadful sight."


juz 22
422
32.
those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed, 
"did we avert you from guidance after it had come to you?  
rather, you were criminals."
33.
those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant,
"rather, [it was your] conspiracy of night and day when you 
were ordering us to disbelieve in allah and attribute to him 
equals."  but they will [all] confide regret when they see the 
punishment; and we will put shackles on the necks of those 
who disbelieved.  will they be recompensed except for what 
they used to do?
34.
and we did not send into a city any warner except that its 
affluent said, "indeed we, in that with which you were sent, 
are disbelievers."
35.
and they1154 said, "we are more [than the believers] in wealth 
and children, and we are not to be punished."
36.
say, "indeed, my lord extends provision for whom he wills 
and restricts [it], but most of the people do not know."
37.
and it is not your wealth or your children that bring you 
nearer to us in position, but it is [by being] one who has 
believed and done righteousness.  for them there will be the 
double reward for what they did, and they will be in the upper 
chambers [of paradise], safe [and secure].
38.
and the ones who strive against our verses to cause [them] 
failure1155 – those will be brought into the punishment [to 
remain].
39.
say, "indeed, my lord extends provision for whom he wills 
of his servants and restricts [it] for him.  but whatever thing 
you spend [in his cause] – he will compensate it; and he is 
the best of providers."
40.
and [mention] the day when he will gather them all and then 
say to the angels, "did these [people] used to worship you?"
                                               
1154the affluent ones in general or the people of makkah specifically.
1155see footnote to 34:5.


juz 22
423
41.
they will say, "exalted are you!  you, [o allah], are our 
benefactor excluding [i.e., not] them.  rather, they used to 
worship the jinn; most of them were believers in them."
42.
but today [i.e., the day of judgement] you do not hold for one 
another [the power of] benefit or harm, and we will say to 
those who wronged, "taste the punishment of the fire, which 
you used to deny."
43.
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
they say, "this is not but a man who wishes to avert you from 
that which your fathers were worshipping."  and they say, 
"this is not except a lie invented."  and those who disbelieve 
say of the truth when it has come to them, "this is not but 
obvious magic."
44.
and we had not given them any scriptures which they could 
study, and we had not sent to them before you, [o muhammad],
any warner.
45.
and those before them denied, and they [i.e., the people of 
makkah] have not attained a tenth of what we had given them.  
but they [i.e., the former peoples] denied my messengers, so 
how [terrible] was my reproach.
46.
say, "i only advise you of one [thing] – that you stand for allah,
[seeking truth] in pairs and individually, and then give thought."  
there is not in your companion any madness.  he is only a 
warner to you before a severe punishment.
47.
say, "whatever payment i might have asked of you – it is yours.  
my payment is only from allah, and he is, over all things, 
witness."
48.
say, "indeed, my lord projects the truth, knower of the unseen."
49.
say, "the truth has come, and falsehood can neither begin 
[anything] nor repeat [it]."1156
                                               
1156this expression alludes to complete inability, meaning that falsehood 
was abolished.


juz 22
424
50.
say, "if i should err, i would only err against myself.  but if i 
am guided, it is by what my lord reveals to me.  indeed, he is 
hearing and near."
51.
and if you could see1157 when they are terrified but there is no 
escape, and they will be seized from a place nearby.
52.
and they will [then] say, "we believe in it!"  but how for 
them will be the taking1158 [of faith] from a place far away?1159
53.
and they had already disbelieved in it before and would 
assault1160 the unseen from a place far away.1161
54.
and prevention will be placed between them and what they 
desire,1162 as was done with their kind before.  indeed, they were
in disquieting doubt [i.e., denial].
                                               
1157i.e., have a glimpse of the hereafter.
1158literally, "taking of something within easy reach," in other words, 
"how can they expect to obtain faith at this point?"
1159i.e., their former life on earth, wherein they had every opportunity but 
which is now gone, never to return.
1160verbally, by conjecture and denial.
1161i.e., a position far from truth.
1162meaning the attainment of faith and its benefits or entrance into paradise.

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
425
surah fatir
1163
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. [all] praise is [due] to allah, creator of the heavens and the
earth, [who] made the angels messengers having wings, two or 
three or four.  he increases in creation what he wills.  indeed, 
allah is over all things competent.
2. whatever allah grants to people of mercy – none can withhold 
it; and whatever he withholds – none can release it thereafter.  
and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
3. o mankind, remember the favor of allah upon you.  is there 
any creator other than allah who provides for you from the 
heaven and earth?  there is no deity except him, so how are 
you deluded?
4. and if they deny you, [o muhammad] – already were 
messengers denied before you.  and to allah are returned [all] 
matters.
5. o mankind, indeed the promise of allah is truth, so let not the 
worldly life delude you and be not deceived about allah by the 
deceiver [i.e., satan].
6. indeed, satan is an enemy to you; so take him as an enemy.  he 
only invites his party to be among the companions of the blaze.
7. those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment, and those 
who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and 
great reward.
8. then is one to whom the evil of his deed has been made 
attractive so he considers it good [like one rightly guided]?  for 
indeed, allah sends astray whom he wills and guides whom he 
wills.  so do not let yourself perish over them in regret.  indeed, 
allah is knowing of what they do.
                                               
1163fatir:  the creator, originator (of creation), or he who brings (it) into 
existence from nothing.  also called al-malaikah (the angels).

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
426
9.
and it is allah who sends the winds, and they stir the clouds, 
and we drive them to a dead land and give life thereby to the 
earth after its lifelessness.  thus is the resurrection.
10.
whoever desires honor [through power] – then to allah belongs
all honor.1164  to him ascends good speech, and righteous 
work raises it.1165  but they who plot evil deeds will have a 
severe punishment, and the plotting of those – it will perish.
11.
and allah created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop; 
then he made you mates.  and no female conceives nor does 
she give birth except with his knowledge.  and no aged 
person is granted [additional] life nor is his lifespan lessened 
but that it is in a register.  indeed, that for allah is easy.
12.
and not alike are the two seas [i.e., bodies of water].  one is 
fresh and sweet, palatable for drinking, and one is salty and 
bitter.  and from each you eat tender meat and extract 
ornaments which you wear, and you see the ships plowing 
through [them] that you might seek of his bounty; and 
perhaps you will be grateful.
13.
he causes the night to enter the day, and he causes the day to 
enter the night and has subjected the sun and the moon – each 
running [its course] for a specified term.  that is allah, your lord;
to him belongs sovereignty.  and those whom you invoke other 
than him do not possess [as much as] the membrane of a date 
seed.
14.
if you invoke them, they do not hear your supplication; and if 
they heard, they would not respond to you.  and on the day of 
resurrection they will deny your association.1166  and none 
can inform you like [one] acquainted [with all matters].
15.
o mankind, you are those in need of allah, while allah is the 
free of need, the praiseworthy.
                                               
1164see footnote to 4:139.
1165for acceptance by allah, meaning that righteous deeds are confirmation 
and proof of what is uttered by the tongue.
1166of them with allah or your worship of them.

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
427
16.
if he wills, he can do away with you and bring forth a new 
creation.
17.
and that is for allah not difficult.
18.
and no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another.  
and if a heavily laden soul calls [another] to [carry some of] 
its load, nothing of it will be carried, even if he should be a 
close relative.  you can only warn those who fear their lord 
unseen and have established prayer.  and whoever purifies 
himself only purifies himself for [the benefit of] his soul.  and 
to allah is the [final] destination.
19.
not equal are the blind and the seeing,
20.
nor are the darknesses and the light,
21.
nor are the shade and the heat,1167
22.
and not equal are the living and the dead.  indeed, allah causes
to hear whom he wills, but you cannot make hear those in the 
graves.1168
23.
you, [o muhammad], are not but a warner.
24.
indeed, we have sent you with the truth as a bringer of good 
tidings and a warner.  and there was no nation but that there 
had passed within it a warner.
25.
and if they deny you – then already have those before them 
denied.  their messengers came to them with clear proofs and 
written ordinances and with the enlightening scripture.
26.
then i seized the ones who disbelieved, and how [terrible] 
was my reproach.
27.
do you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky, and 
we produce thereby fruits of varying colors?  and in the 
mountains are tracts, white and red of varying shades and 
[some] extremely black.
                                               
1167of the sun or of a scorching wind.
1168the four comparisons given by allah (subhanahu wa taala) in verses 
19-22 are those of the believer and unbeliever, various kinds of misbelief
and (true) belief, paradise and hellfire, and those receptive to guidance 
and those unreceptive.

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
428
28.
and among people and moving creatures and grazing livestock 
are various colors similarly.  only those fear allah, from among
his servants, who have knowledge.  indeed, allah is exalted 
in might and forgiving.
29.
indeed, those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer
and spend [in his cause] out of what we have provided them, 
secretly and publicly, [can] expect a transaction [i.e., profit] 
that will never perish –
30.
that he may give them in full their rewards and increase for 
them of his bounty.  indeed, he is forgiving and appreciative.
31.
and that which we have revealed to you, [o muhammad], of 
the book is the truth, confirming what was before it.  indeed 
allah, of his servants, is acquainted and seeing.
32.
then we caused to inherit the book those we have chosen of 
our servants;1169 and among them is he who wrongs himself 
[i.e., sins], and among them is he who is moderate, and among 
them is he who is foremost in good deeds by permission of 
allah.  that [inheritance] is what is the great bounty.
33.
[for them are] gardens of perpetual residence which they will
enter.  they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and 
pearls, and their garments therein will be silk.
34.
and they will say, "praise to allah, who has removed from us 
[all] sorrow.  indeed, our lord is forgiving and appreciative –
35.
he who has settled us in the home of duration [i.e., paradise] 
out of his bounty.  there touches us not in it any fatigue, and 
there touches us not in it weariness [of mind]."
36.
and for those who disbelieve will be the fire of hell.  [death] 
is not decreed for them1170 so they may die, nor will its torment
be lightened for them.  thus do we recompense every ungrateful
one.
                                               
1169the followers of prophet muhammad ().
1170or "they are not killed."

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
429
37.
and they will cry out therein, "our lord, remove us;1171 we 
will do righteousness – other than what we were doing!"  but 
did we not grant you life enough for whoever would remember
therein to remember, and the warner had come to you?  so taste
[the punishment], for there is not for the wrongdoers any helper.
38.
indeed, allah is knower of the unseen [aspects] of the heavens
and earth.  indeed, he is knowing of that within the breasts.
39.
it is he who has made you successors upon the earth.  and 
whoever disbelieves – upon him will be [the consequence of] 
his disbelief.  and the disbelief of the disbelievers does not 
increase them in the sight of their lord except in hatred; and 
the disbelief of the disbelievers does not increase them except 
in loss.
40.
say, "have you considered1172 your 'partners' whom you 
invoke besides allah?  show me what they have created from 
the earth, or have they partnership [with him] in the heavens?  
or have we given them a book so they are [standing] on 
evidence therefrom?  [no], rather, the wrongdoers do not 
promise each other except delusion."1173
41.
indeed, allah holds the heavens and the earth, lest they cease.  
and if they should cease, no one could hold them [in place] 
after him.  indeed, he is forbearing and forgiving.
42.
and they swore by allah their strongest oaths that if a warner 
came to them, they would be more guided than [any] one of 
the [previous] nations.  but when a warner came to them, it 
did not increase them except in aversion
43.
[due to] arrogance in the land and plotting of evil; but the evil 
plot does not encompass except its own people.  then do they 
await except the way [i.e., fate] of the former peoples?  but you 
will never find in the way [i.e., established method] of allah 
                                               
1171the implication is "return us to the previous world."
1172understood to mean "tell me about..."
1173by telling their followers that the so-called deities will intercede for 
them with allah.

surah 35 – fatir
juz 22
430
any change, and you will never find in the way of allah1174
any alteration.1175
44.
have they not traveled through the land and observed how 
was the end of those before them?  and they were greater than 
them in power.  but allah is not to be caused failure [i.e., 
prevented] by anything in the heavens or on the earth.  indeed, 
he is ever knowing and competent.
45.
and if allah were to impose blame on the people for what 
they have earned, he would not leave upon it [i.e., the earth] 
any creature.  but he defers them for a specified term.  and 
when their time comes, then indeed allah has ever been, of 
his servants, seeing.
                                               
1174i.e., in his punishment of those who deny the prophets.
1175or "transfer" of punishment to others in place of them.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 22
431
surah ya seen
1176
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
yœ, seen.1177
2.
by the wise1178 quran,
3.
indeed you, [o muhammad], are from among the messengers,
4.
on a straight path.
5.
[this is] a revelation of the exalted in might, the merciful,
6.
that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned,
so they are unaware.
7.
already the word [i.e., decree] has come into effect upon most 
of them, so they do not believe.
8.
indeed, we have put shackles on their necks, and they are to 
their chins, so they are with heads [kept] aloft.
9.
and we have put before them a barrier and behind them a 
barrier and covered them, so they do not see.
10.
and it is all the same for them whether you warn them or do 
not warn them – they will not believe.
11.
you can only warn one who follows the message and fears the 
most merciful unseen.  so give him good tidings of forgiveness
and noble reward.
12.
indeed, it is we who bring the dead to life and record what 
they have put forth and what they left behind, and all things 
we have enumerated in a clear register.
13.
and present to them an example:  the people of the city, when 
the messengers came to it –
14.
when we sent to them two but they denied them, so we 
strengthened them with a third, and they said, "indeed, we are 
messengers to you."
                                               
1176ya seen:  (the letters) yœ and seen.
1177see footnote to 2:1.
1178see footnote to 10:1.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
432
15.
they said, "you are not but human beings like us, and the most 
merciful has not revealed a thing.  you are only telling lies."
16.
they said, "our lord knows that we are messengers to you,
17.
and we are not responsible except for clear notification."
18.
they said, "indeed, we consider you a bad omen.  if you do not
desist, we will surely stone you, and there will surely touch you,
from us, a painful punishment."
19.
they said, "your omen [i.e., fate] is with yourselves.  is it1179
because you were reminded?  rather, you are a transgressing 
people."
20.
and there came from the farthest end of the city a man, running.  
he said, "o my people, follow the messengers.
21.
follow those who do not ask of you [any] payment, and they 
are [rightly] guided.
22.
and why should i not worship he who created me and to whom
you will be returned?
23.
should i take other than him [false] deities [while], if the most
merciful intends for me some adversity, their intercession will 
not avail me at all, nor can they save me?
24.
indeed, i would then be in manifest error.
25.
indeed, i have believed in your lord, so listen to me."
26.
it was said, "enter paradise."1180  he said, "i wish my people 
could know
27.
of how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the 
honored."
28.
and we did not send down upon his people after him any 
soldiers from the heaven, nor would we have done so.
                                               
1179your threat against us.
1180an abrupt transfer to the hereafter conveys the meaning that the man 
met a violent death at the hands of the disbelievers and so was martyred 
for the cause of allah.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
433
29.
it was not but one shout,1181 and immediately they were 
extinguished.
30.
how regretful for the servants.  there did not come to them 
any messenger except that they used to ridicule him.
31.
have they not considered how many generations we destroyed 
before them – that they to them1182 will not return?
32.
and indeed, all of them will yet be brought present before us.
33.
and a sign for them is the dead earth.  we have brought it to 
life and brought forth from it grain, and from it they eat.
34.
and we placed therein gardens of palm trees and grapevines 
and caused to burst forth therefrom some springs –
35.
that they may eat of his fruit.1183  and their hands have not 
produced it,1184 so will they not be grateful?
36.
exalted is he who created all pairs1185 – from what the earth 
grows and from themselves and from that which they do not 
know.
37.
and a sign for them is the night.  we remove1186 from it the 
[light of] day, so they are [left] in darkness.
38.
and the sun runs [on course] toward its stopping point.  that 
is the determination of the exalted in might, the knowing.
39.
and the moon – we have determined for it phases, until it 
returns [appearing] like the old date stalk.
40.
it is not allowable [i.e., possible] for the sun to reach the moon,
nor does the night overtake the day, but each, in an orbit, is 
swimming.
                                               
1181from gabriel or a blast from the sky.
1182i.e., to those living presently in the world.
1183i.e., that which allah has produced for them.
1184an alternative meaning is "and [eat from] what their hands have produced
[i.e., planted and harvested]."  both are grammatically correct.
1185or "all species."
1186literally, "strip" or "peel."  sunlight projected onto the earth is removed 
from it as the earth turns and night approaches.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
434
41.
and a sign for them is that we carried their forefathers1187 in a 
laden ship.
42.
and we created for them from the likes of it that which they 
ride.
43.
and if we should will, we could drown them; then no one 
responding to a cry would there be for them, nor would they 
be saved
44.
except as a mercy from us and provision for a time.
45.
but when it is said to them, "beware of what is before you and 
what is behind you;1188 perhaps you will receive mercy..."1189
46.
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord 
except that they are from it turning away.
47.
and when it is said to them, "spend from that which allah 
has provided for you," those who disbelieve say to those who 
believe, "should we feed one whom, if allah had willed, he 
would have fed?  you are not but in clear error."
48.
and they say, "when is this promise, if you should be truthful?"
49.
they do not await except one blast1190 which will seize them 
while they are disputing.
50.
and they will not be able [to give] any instruction, nor to their 
people can they return.
51.
and the horn will be blown;1191 and at once from the graves 
to their lord they will hasten.
52.
they will say, "o woe to us!  who has raised us up from our 
                                               
1187usually meaning "descendants" or "offspring," the word "dhurriyyah" is 
used here to denote forefathers (their being the offspring of noah), who 
were saved from the flood.
1188of sins or of life in this world and the hereafter.
1189the conclusion of this sentence is understood to be "...they ignored the 
warning."
1190literally, "cry" or "shriek," meaning the first blast of the horn which 
will strike dead every living thing on the earth without warning.
1191for the second time, signaling the resurrection.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
435
sleeping place?"  [the reply will be], "this is what the most 
merciful had promised, and the messengers told the truth."
53.
it will not be but one blast, and at once they are all brought 
present before us.
54.
so today [i.e., the day of judgement] no soul will be wronged 
at all, and you will not be recompensed except for what you 
used to do.
55.
indeed the companions of paradise, that day, will be amused 
in [joyful] occupation –
56.
they and their spouses – in shade, reclining on adorned couches.
57.
for them therein is fruit, and for them is whatever they request
[or wish]
58.
[and] "peace," a word from a merciful lord.
59.
[then he will say], "but stand apart today, you criminals.1192
60.
did i not enjoin upon you, o children of adam, that you not 
worship satan – [for] indeed, he is to you a clear enemy –
61.
and that you worship [only] me?  this is a straight path.
62.
and he had already led astray from among you much of creation,
so did you not use reason?
63.
this is the hellfire which you were promised.
64.
[enter to] burn therein today for what you used to deny."1193
65.
that day, we will seal over their mouths, and their hands will 
speak to us, and their feet will testify about what they used to 
earn.
66.
and if we willed, we could have obliterated their eyes, and 
they would race to [find] the path, and how could they see?1194
                                               
1192i.e., remove yourself from the ranks of the believers to be distinguished 
from them.
1193or "because you used to disbelieve."
1194allah (subhanahu wa taala) could have left man without means of 
guidance in the life of this world, although in his mercy he did not.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
436
67.
and if we willed, we could have deformed them, [paralyzing 
them] in their places so they would not be able to proceed, nor 
could they return.1195
68.
and he to whom we grant long life we reverse in creation;1196
so will they not understand?
69.
and we did not give him [i.e., prophet muhammad ()] 
knowledge of poetry, nor is it befitting for him.  it is not but a 
message and a clear quran
70.
to warn whoever is alive1197 and justify the word [i.e., decree] 
against the disbelievers.
71.
do they not see that we have created for them from what our 
hands1198 have made, grazing livestock, and [then] they are 
their owners?
72.
and we have tamed them for them, so some of them they ride,
and some of them they eat.
73.
and for them therein are [other] benefits and drinks, so will 
they not be grateful?
74.
but they have taken besides allah [false] deities that perhaps 
they would be helped.
75.
they are not able to help them, and they [themselves] are for 
them soldiers in attendance.1199
76.
so let not their speech grieve you.  indeed, we know what 
they conceal and what they declare.
77.
does man not consider that we created him from a [mere] 
sperm-drop – then at once1200 he is a clear adversary?
                                               
1195he (subhanahu wa taala) could have prevented man from taking any 
action to benefit himself in this world or the hereafter, yet he did not.
1196in his physical and mental capacity.
1197in heart and mind, i.e., the believers.
1198see footnote to 2:19.
1199maintaining and protecting their "gods."  another interpretation is that 
they (i.e., the gods) will be soldiers set against them in hellfire.
1200i.e., as soon as he becomes self-sufficient.

surah 36 – ya seen
juz 23
437
78.
and he presents for us an example1201 and forgets his [own] 
creation.  he says, "who will give life to bones while they are 
disintegrated?"
79.
say, "he will give them life who produced them the first time; 
and he is, of all creation, knowing."
80.
[it is] he who made for you from the green tree, fire, and then 
from it you ignite.
81.
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create 
the likes of them?  yes, [it is so]; and he is the knowing creator.
82.
his command is only when he intends a thing that he says to it,
"be," and it is.
83.
so exalted is he in whose hand is the realm of all things, and 
to him you will be returned.
                                               
1201attempting to establish the finality of death.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
438
surah as-saffat
1202
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by those [angels] lined up in rows
2.
and those who drive [the clouds]
3.
and those who recite the message,1203
4.
indeed, your god is one,
5.
lord of the heavens and the earth and that between them and 
lord of the sunrises.1204
6.
indeed, we have adorned the nearest heaven with an adornment
of stars
7.
and as protection against every rebellious devil
8.
[so] they may not listen to the exalted assembly [of angels] 
and are pelted from every side,1205
9.
repelled; and for them is a constant punishment,
10.
except one who snatches [some words] by theft, but they are 
pursued by a burning flame, piercing [in brightness].
11.
then inquire of them, [o muhammad], "are they a stronger 
[or more difficult] creation or those [others] we have created?"  
indeed, we created them [i.e., men] from sticky clay.
12.
but you wonder, while they mock,
13.
and when they are reminded, they remember not.
14.
and when they see a sign, they ridicule
15.
and say, "this is not but obvious magic.
                                               
1202as-saffat:  those lined up.
1203to the prophets or among themselves.  allah (subhanahu wa taala) 
swears by these three kinds of angels to the fact mentioned in the 
following verse.
1204i.e., each point or place of sunrise.
1205by flaming meteors.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
439
16.
when we have died and become dust and bones, are we indeed
to be resurrected?
17.
and our forefathers [as well]?"
18.
say, "yes, and you will be [rendered] contemptible."
19.
it will be only one shout, and at once they will be observing.
20.
they will say, "o woe to us!  this is the day of recompense."
21.
[they will be told], "this is the day of judgement which you
used to deny."
22.
[the angels will be ordered], "gather those who committed 
wrong, their kinds,1206 and what they used to worship
23.
other than allah, and guide them to the path of hellfire
24.
and stop them; indeed, they are to be questioned."
25.
[they will be asked], "what is [wrong] with you?  why do 
you not help each other?"
26.
but they, that day, are in surrender.
27.
and they will approach one another asking [i.e., blaming] 
each other.
28.
they will say, "indeed, you used to come at us from the right."1207
29.
they [i.e., the oppressors] will say, "rather, you [yourselves] were 
not believers,
30.
and we had over you no authority, but you were a transgressing
people.
31.
so the word [i.e., decree] of our lord has come into effect 
upon us; indeed, we will taste [punishment].
32.
and we led you to deviation; indeed, we were deviators."
33.
so indeed they, that day, will be sharing in the punishment.
                                               
1206those similar to them in evil deeds.  another possible meaning is "their 
wives."
1207i.e., from our position of strength, oppressing us.  or from where we 
would have grasped the truth, preventing us.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
440
34.
indeed, that is how we deal with the criminals.
35.
indeed they, when it was said to them, "there is no deity but 
allah," were arrogant
36.
and were saying, "are we to leave our gods for a mad poet?"
37.
rather, he [i.e., the prophet ()] has come with the truth and 
confirmed the [previous] messengers.
38.
indeed, you [disbelievers] will be tasters of the painful 
punishment,
39.
and you will not be recompensed except for what you used to 
do –
40.
but not the chosen servants of allah.
41.
those will have a provision determined –
42.
fruits;1208 and they will be honored
43.
in gardens of pleasure
44.
on thrones facing one another.
45.
there will be circulated among them a cup [of wine] from a 
flowing spring,
46.
white and delicious to the drinkers;
47.
no bad effect is there in it, nor from it will they be intoxicated.
48.
and with them will be women limiting [their] glances,1209
with large, [beautiful] eyes,
49.
as if they were [delicate] eggs, well-protected.
50.
and they will approach one another, inquiring of each other.
51.
a speaker among them will say, "indeed, i had a companion 
[on earth]
52.
who would say, 'are you indeed of those who believe
53.
that when we have died and become dust and bones, we will 
indeed be recompensed?'"
                                               
1208meaning everything delicious.
1209i.e., chaste and modest, looking only at their mates.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
441
54.
he will say,1210 "would you [care to] look?"
55.
and he will look and see him1211 in the midst of the hellfire.
56.
he will say, "by allah, you almost ruined me.
57.
if not for the favor of my lord, i would have been of those 
brought in [to hell].
58.
then, are we not to die
59.
except for our first death, and we will not be punished?"
60.
indeed, this is the great attainment.
61.
for the like of this let the workers [on earth] work.
62.
is that [i.e., paradise] a better accommodation or the tree of 
zaqqum?
63.
indeed, we have made it a torment for the wrongdoers.
64.
indeed, it is a tree issuing from the bottom of the hellfire,
65.
its emerging fruit as if it was heads of the devils.
66.
and indeed, they will eat from it and fill with it their bellies.
67.
then indeed, they will have after it a mixture of scalding water.
68.
then indeed, their return will be to the hellfire.
69.
indeed they found their fathers astray.
70.
so they hastened [to follow] in their footsteps.
71.
and there had already strayed before them most of the former 
peoples,
72.
and we had already sent among them warners.
73.
then look how was the end of those who were warned –
74.
but not the chosen servants of allah.
75.
and noah had certainly called us, and [we are] the best of 
responders.
76.
and we saved him and his family from the great affliction.
                                               
1210to his companions in paradise.
1211the companion who had tried to dissuade him from belief on earth.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
442
77.
and we made his descendants those remaining [on the earth]
78.
and left for him [favorable mention] among later generations:
79.
"peace upon noah among the worlds."
80.
indeed, we thus reward the doers of good.
81.
indeed, he was of our believing servants.
82.
then we drowned the others [i.e., disbelievers].
83.
and indeed, among his kind was ibrahim,
84.
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
85.
[and] when he said to his father and his people, "what do you 
worship?
86.
is it falsehood [as] gods other than allah you desire?
87.
then what is your thought about the lord of the worlds?"
88.
and he cast a look at the stars
89.
and said, "indeed, i am [about to be] ill."
90.
so they turned away from him, departing.
91.
then he turned to their gods and said, "do you not eat?1212
92.
what is [wrong] with you that you do not speak?"
93.
and he turned upon them a blow with [his] right hand.
94.
then they [i.e., the people] came toward him, hastening.
95.
he said, "do you worship that which you [yourselves] carve,
96.
while allah created you and that which you do?"
97.
they said, "construct for him a structure [i.e., furnace] and 
throw him into the burning fire."
98.
and they intended for him a plan [i.e., harm], but we made 
them the most debased.
99.
and [then] he said, "indeed, i will go to [where i am ordered by]
my lord; he will guide me.
                                               
1212consume the offerings placed before them.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
443
100. my lord, grant me [a child] from among the righteous."
101. so we gave him good tidings of a forbearing boy.
102. and when he reached with him [the age of] exertion,1213 he 
said, "o my son, indeed i have seen in a dream that i [must] 
sacrifice you, so see what you think."  he said, "o my father, 
do as you are commanded.  you will find me, if allah wills, 
of the steadfast."
103. and when they had both submitted1214 and he put him down 
upon his forehead,
104. we called to him, "o ibrahim,
105. you have fulfilled the vision."  indeed, we thus reward the 
doers of good.
106. indeed, this was the clear trial.
107. and we ransomed him with a great sacrifice,1215
108. and we left for him [favorable mention] among later generations:
109. "peace upon ibrahim."
110. indeed, we thus reward the doers of good.
111. indeed, he was of our believing servants.
112. and we gave him good tidings of isaac, a prophet from among 
the righteous.1216
113. and we blessed him and isaac.  but among their descendants 
is the doer of good and the clearly unjust to himself [i.e., sinner].
114. and we did certainly confer favor upon moses and aaron.
115. and we saved them and their people from the great affliction,
116. and we supported them so it was they who overcame.
                                               
1213i.e., the ability to work and be of assistance.
1214to the command of allah.
1215allah (subhanahu wa taala) sent a huge ram to be sacrificed in place of 
ishmael.
1216this verifies that the firstborn son who was to be sacrificed was ishmael 
and not isaac, as claimed by the jews and christians.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
444
117. and we gave them the explicit scripture [i.e., the torah],
118. and we guided them on the straight path.
119. and we left for them [favorable mention] among later 
generations:
120. "peace upon moses and aaron."
121. indeed, we thus reward the doers of good.
122. indeed, they were of our believing servants.
123. and indeed, elias was from among the messengers,
124. when he said to his people, "will you not fear allah?
125. do you call upon bal1217 and leave the best of creators –
126. allah, your lord and the lord of your first forefathers?"
127. and they denied him, so indeed, they will be brought [for 
punishment],
128. except the chosen servants of allah.
129. and we left for him [favorable mention] among later generations:
130. "peace upon elias."1218
131. indeed, we thus reward the doers of good.
132. indeed, he was of our believing servants.
133. and indeed, lot was among the messengers.
134. [so mention] when we saved him and his family, all,
135. except an old woman [i.e., his wife] among those who remained
[with the evildoers].
136. then we destroyed the others.
137. and indeed, you pass by them in the morning
138. and at night.  then will you not use reason?
139. and indeed, jonah was among the messengers.
                                               
1217the name of a great idol worshipped by the people and said to mean "lord."
1218ilyaseen is said by some commentators to be a plural form, meaning 
"elias and those who followed him."

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
445
140. [mention] when he ran away to the laden ship.
141. and he drew lots1219 and was among the losers.
142. then the fish swallowed him, while he was blameworthy.1220
143. and had he not been of those who exalt allah,
144. he would have remained inside its belly until the day they are 
resurrected.1221
145. but we threw him onto the open shore while he was ill.
146. and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine.1222
147. and we sent him1223 to [his people of] a hundred thousand or 
more.
148. and they believed, so we gave them enjoyment [of life] for a 
time.
149. so inquire of them, [o muhammad], "does your lord have 
daughters while they have sons?1224
150. or did we create the angels as females while they were 
witnesses?"
151. unquestionably, it is out of their [invented] falsehood that 
they say,
152. "allah has begotten," and indeed, they are liars.
153. has he chosen daughters over sons?
154. what is [wrong] with you?  how do you make judgement?
155. then will you not be reminded?
                                               
1219to determine who would be cast overboard in order to save the other 
passengers.  having been overloaded, the ship was on the verge of sinking.
1220for having given up hope on his people prematurely and having left 
them without permission from allah.
1221meaning that the belly of the fish would have become his grave.
1222which is known to give cooling shade and to be a repellent of flies.
1223i.e., returned him thereafter.
1224the people of makkah claimed that the angels were daughters of allah, 
yet they preferred sons for themselves.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
446
156. or do you have a clear authority?
157. then produce your scripture, if you should be truthful.
158. and they have made [i.e., claimed] between him and the jinn 
a lineage, but the jinn have already known that they [who made
such claims] will be brought [to punishment].
159. exalted is allah above what they describe,
160. except the chosen servants of allah [who do not share in that sin].
161. so indeed, you [disbelievers] and whatever you worship,
162. you cannot tempt [anyone] away from him
163. except he who is to [enter and] burn in the hellfire.1225
164. [the angels say],1226 "there is not among us any except that 
he has a known position.1227
165. and indeed, we are those who line up [for prayer].
166. and indeed, we are those who exalt allah."
167. and indeed, they [i.e., the disbelievers] used to say,1228
168. "if we had a message from [those of] the former peoples,
169. we would have been the chosen servants of allah."
170. but they disbelieved in it,1229 so they are going to know.
171. and our word [i.e., decree] has already preceded for our servants,
the messengers,
172. [that] indeed, they would be those given victory
173. and [that] indeed, our soldiers [i.e., the believers] will be those
who overcome.1230
174. so, [o muhammad], leave them for a time.
                                               
1225due to his disbelief and evil deeds.
1226refuting what the disbelievers had said about them.
1227for worship.  or "an assigned task" to perform.
1228before the revelation of the quran.
1229i.e., in their own message, the quran.
1230if not in this world, then definitely in the hereafter.

surah 37 – as-saffat
juz 23
447
175. and see [what will befall] them, for they are going to see.
176. then for our punishment are they impatient?
177. but when it descends in their territory, then evil is the morning
of those who were warned.
178. and leave them for a time.
179. and see, for they are going to see.
180. exalted is your lord, the lord of might, above what they describe.
181. and peace upon the messengers.
182. and praise to allah, lord of the worlds.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
448
surah saad
1231
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
saad.1232  by the quran containing reminder...1233
2.
but those who disbelieve are in pride and dissension.
3.
how many a generation have we destroyed before them, and 
they [then] called out; but it was not a time for escape.
4.
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner [i.e.,
prophet muhammad ()] from among themselves.  and the 
disbelievers say, "this is a magician and a liar.
5.
has he made the gods [only] one god?  indeed, this is a curious
thing."
6.
and the eminent among them went forth, [saying], "continue, 
and be patient over [the defense of] your gods.  indeed, this is 
a thing intended.1234
7.
we have not heard of this in the latest religion.1235  this is not 
but a fabrication.
8.
has the message been revealed to him out of [all of] us?"  
rather, they are in doubt about my message.  rather, they have
not yet tasted my punishment.
9.
or do they have the depositories of the mercy of your lord, 
the exalted in might, the bestower?
10.
or is theirs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and 
what is between them?  then let them ascend through [any] 
ways of access.1236
                                               
1231saad:  (the letter) §œd.
1232see footnote to 2:1.
1233the completion of the oath is understood to be that the quran is inimitable
and thus a miracle from allah.
1234planned by prophet muhammad () in order to gain influence and 
prestige for himself.
1235referring to christianity or possibly the pagan religion of the quraysh.
1236to oversee the affairs of their dominion.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
449
11.
[they are but] soldiers [who will be] defeated there among the 
companies [of disbelievers].
12.
the people of noah denied before them, and [the tribe of] aad
and pharaoh, the owner of stakes,1237
13.
and [the tribe of] thamud and the people of lot and the 
companions of the thicket [i.e., people of madyan].  those are 
the companies.1238
14.
each of them denied the messengers, so my penalty was 
justified.
15.
and these [disbelievers] await not but one blast [of the horn]; 
for it there will be no delay.1239
16.
and they say, "our lord, hasten for us our share [of the 
punishment] before the day of account."
17.
be patient over what they say and remember our servant, david,
the possessor of strength; indeed, he was one who repeatedly 
turned back [to allah].
18.
indeed, we subjected the mountains [to praise] with him, 
exalting [allah] in the [late] afternoon and [after] sunrise.
19.
and the birds were assembled, all with him repeating [praises].
20.
and we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and 
discernment in speech.
21.
and has there come to you the news of the adversaries, when 
they climbed over the wall of [his] prayer chamber –
22.
when they entered upon david and he was alarmed by them?  
they said, "fear not.  [we are] two adversaries, one of whom 
has wronged the other, so judge between us with truth and do 
not exceed [it] and guide us to the sound path.
                                               
1237by which he tortured people.
1238that were defeated, among whom will be the disbelievers of quraysh 
and others.
1239or "respite."  more literally, "a period between two milkings of a she-camel,"
which also alludes to the meanings of "return" or "repetition."

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
450
23.
indeed this, my brother, has ninety-nine ewes, and i have one ewe; 
so he said, 'entrust her to me,' and he overpowered me in speech."
24.
[david] said, "he has certainly wronged you in demanding your
ewe [in addition] to his ewes.  and indeed, many associates 
oppress one another, except for those who believe and do 
righteous deeds – and few are they."  and david became 
certain that we had tried him, and he asked forgiveness of his 
lord1240 and fell down bowing [in prostration] and turned in 
repentance [to allah].
25.
so we forgave him that; and indeed, for him is nearness to us 
and a good place of return.
26.
[we said], "o david, indeed we have made you a successor 
upon the earth, so judge between the people in truth and do 
not follow [your own] desire, as it will lead you astray from 
the way of allah."  indeed, those who go astray from the way 
of allah will have a severe punishment for having forgotten 
the day of account.
27.
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and that between
them aimlessly.  that is the assumption of those who disbelieve,
so woe to those who disbelieve from the fire.
28.
or should we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds 
like corrupters in the land?  or should we treat those who fear 
allah like the wicked?
29.
[this is] a blessed book which we have revealed to you, [o 
muhammad], that they might reflect upon its verses and that 
those of understanding would be reminded.
30.
and to david we gave solomon.  an excellent servant, indeed
he was one repeatedly turning back [to allah].
31.
[mention] when there were exhibited before him in the afternoon
the poised [standing] racehorses.
                                               
1240for his errors, such as fear and suspicion of the two men at the outset, 
any mistake in judgement he might have made, concealed feelings of 
partiality, etc.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
451
32.
and he said, "indeed, i gave preference to the love of good 
[things] over the remembrance of my lord until it [i.e., the sun]
disappeared into the curtain [of darkness]."
33.
[he said], "return them to me," and set about striking1241 [their]
legs and necks.
34.
and we certainly tried solomon and placed on his throne a 
body;1242 then he returned.1243
35.
he said, "my lord, forgive me and grant me a kingdom such 
as will not belong to anyone after me.  indeed, you are the 
bestower."
36.
so we subjected to him the wind blowing by his command, 
gently, wherever he directed,
37.
and [also] the devils [of jinn] – every builder and diver
38.
and others bound together in shackles.
39.
[we said], "this is our gift, so grant or withhold without 
account."
40.
and indeed, for him is nearness to us and a good place of return.
41.
and remember our servant job, when he called to his lord, 
"indeed, satan has touched me with hardship and torment."
42.
[so he was told], "strike [the ground] with your foot; this is a 
[spring for a] cool bath and drink."
43.
and we granted him his family and a like [number] with them 
as mercy from us and a reminder for those of understanding.
44.
[we said], "and take in your hand a bunch [of grass] and strike
with it and do not break your oath."1244  indeed, we found him 
                                               
1241with his sword as expiation.  some commentaries have also suggested 
the meaning of "stroking" with the hand.
1242said to be a devil or a lifeless body (one without capability), but allah 
alone knows.
1243to sovereignty and to allah in repentance.
1244at a point during his illness, job became angry with his wife and swore 
that if he recovered, he would punish her with one hundred lashes.  
according to allah's instruction, the oath was fulfilled by striking her 
once with one hundred blades of grass.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
452
patient, an excellent servant.  indeed, he was one repeatedly 
turning back [to allah].
45.
and remember our servants, ibrahim, isaac and jacob –
those of strength and [religious] vision.
46.
indeed, we chose them for an exclusive quality:  remembrance
of the home [of the hereafter].
47.
and indeed they are, to us, among the chosen and outstanding.
48.
and remember ishmael, elisha and dhul-kifl, and all are 
among the outstanding.
49.
this is a reminder.  and indeed, for the righteous is a good 
place of return –
50.
gardens of perpetual residence, whose doors will be opened 
to them.
51.
reclining within them, they will call therein for abundant fruit 
and drink.
52.
and with them will be women limiting [their] glances1245 and 
of equal age.
53.
this is what you, [the righteous], are promised for the day of 
account.
54.
indeed, this is our provision; for it there is no depletion.
55.
this [is so].  but indeed, for the transgressors is an evil place 
of return –
56.
hell, which they will [enter to] burn, and wretched is the resting
place.
57.
this – so let them taste it – is scalding water and [foul] purulence
58.
and other [punishments] of its type [in various] kinds.
59.
[its inhabitants will say], "this is a company bursting in with
you.  no welcome for them.  indeed, they will burn in the fire."
60.
they will say, "nor you!  no welcome for you.  you, [our
leaders], brought this upon us, and wretched is the settlement."
                                               
1245to their mates alone.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
453
61.
they will say, "our lord, whoever brought this upon us –
increase for him double punishment in the fire."
62.
and they will say, "why do we not see men whom we used to 
count among the worst?1246
63.
is it [because] we took them in ridicule, or has [our] vision 
turned away from them?"
64.
indeed, that is truth [i.e., reality] – the quarreling of the people 
of the fire.
65.
say, [o muhammad], "i am only a warner, and there is not 
any deity except allah, the one, the prevailing,
66.
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between 
them, the exalted in might, the perpetual forgiver."
67.
say, "it is great news
68.
from which you turn away.
69.
i had no knowledge of the exalted assembly [of angels] when 
they were disputing [the creation of adam].
70.
it has not been revealed to me except that i am a clear warner."
71.
[so mention] when your lord said to the angels, "indeed, i am 
going to create a human being from clay.
72.
so when i have proportioned him and breathed into him of 
my [created] soul,1247 then fall down to him in prostration."
73.
so the angels prostrated – all of them entirely,
74.
except iblees;1248 he was arrogant and became among the 
disbelievers.
75.
[allah] said, "o iblees, what prevented you from prostrating 
to that which i created with my hands?1249  were you arrogant 
[then], or were you [already] among the haughty?"
                                               
1246they are referring to the believers.
1247see footnote to 15:29.
1248see footnote to 2:34.
1249see footnote to 2:19.

surah 38 – saad
juz 23
454
76.
he said, "i am better than him.  you created me from fire and 
created him from clay."
77.
[allah] said, "then get out of it [i.e., paradise], for indeed, 
you are expelled.
78.
and indeed, upon you is my curse until the day of recompense."
79.
he said, "my lord, then reprieve me until the day they are 
resurrected."
80.
[allah] said, "so indeed, you are of those reprieved
81.
until the day of the time well-known."
82.
[iblees] said, "by your might, i will surely mislead them all
83.
except, among them, your chosen servants."
84.
[allah] said, "the truth [is my oath], and the truth i say –
85.
[that] i will surely fill hell with you and those of them that 
follow you all together."
86.
say, [o muhammad], "i do not ask you for it [i.e., the quran] 
any payment, and i am not of the pretentious.
87.
it is but a reminder to the worlds.
88.
and you will surely know [the truth of] its information after a 
time."

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 23
455
surah az-zumar
1250
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. the revelation of the book [i.e., the quran] is from allah, the 
exalted in might, the wise.
2. indeed, we have sent down to you the book, [o muhammad], 
in truth.  so worship allah, [being] sincere to him in religion.
3. unquestionably, for allah is the pure religion.1251  and those who
take protectors besides him [say], "we only worship them that 
they may bring us nearer to allah in position."  indeed, allah 
will judge between them concerning that over which they differ.  
indeed, allah does not guide he who is a liar and [confirmed] 
disbeliever.
4. if allah had intended to take a son, he could have chosen from 
what he creates whatever he willed.  exalted is he; he is allah,
the one, the prevailing.
5. he created the heavens and earth in truth.  he wraps the night 
over the day and wraps the day over the night and has subjected 
the sun and the moon, each running [its course] for a specified 
term.  unquestionably, he is the exalted in might, the perpetual 
forgiver.
6. he created you from one soul.  then he made from it its mate, 
and he produced for you from the grazing livestock eight mates.1252  
he creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after 
creation, within three darknesses.1253  that is allah, your lord; 
to him belongs dominion.  there is no deity except him, so how
are you averted?
7. if you disbelieve – indeed, allah is free from need of you.  and 
                                               
1250az-zumar:  the groups.
1251i.e., acceptable to allah is that none be associated with him in worship 
and obedience.
1252see 6:143-144.
1253i.e., the belly, the womb, and the amniotic membrane.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 23
456
he does not approve for his servants disbelief.  and if you are 
grateful, he approves [i.e., likes] it for you; and no bearer of 
burdens will bear the burden of another.  then to your lord is 
your return, and he will inform you about what you used to do.  
indeed, he is knowing of that within the breasts.
8.
and when adversity touches man, he calls upon his lord, 
turning to him [alone]; then when he bestows on him a favor 
from himself, he forgets him whom he called upon before,1254
and he attributes to allah equals to mislead [people] from his 
way.  say, "enjoy your disbelief for a little; indeed, you are of 
the companions of the fire."
9.
is one who is devoutly obedient during periods of the night, 
prostrating and standing [in prayer], fearing the hereafter and 
hoping for the mercy of his lord, [like one who does not]?  
say, "are those who know equal to those who do not know?"  
only they will remember [who are] people of understanding.
10.
say,1255 "o my servants who have believed, fear your lord.  
for those who do good in this world is good, and the earth of 
allah is spacious.  indeed, the patient will be given their reward 
without account [i.e., limit]."
11.
say, [o muhammad], "indeed, i have been commanded to 
worship allah, [being] sincere to him in religion.
12.
and i have been commanded to be the first [among you] of 
the muslims."
13.
say, "indeed i fear, if i should disobey my lord, the punishment
of a tremendous day."
14.
say, "allah [alone] do i worship, sincere to him in my religion,
15.
so worship what you will besides him."  say, "indeed, the losers
are the ones who will lose themselves and their families on the 
day of resurrection.  unquestionably, that is the manifest loss."
                                               
1254or "that for which he called upon him before."
1255the prophet () is instructed to say on behalf of allah (subhanahu wa 
taala) to his believing servants.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 23
457
16.
they will have canopies [i.e., layers] of fire above them and
below them, canopies.  by that allah threatens [i.e., warns] his
servants.  o my servants, then fear me.
17.
but those who have avoided taghut,1256 lest they worship it, 
and turned back to allah – for them are good tidings.  so give 
good tidings to my servants
18.
who listen to speech and follow the best of it.  those are the 
ones allah has guided, and those are people of understanding.
19.
then, is one who has deserved the decree of punishment [to 
be guided]?  then, can you save one who is in the fire?
20.
but those who have feared their lord – for them are chambers,1257
above them chambers built high, beneath which rivers flow.  
[this is] the promise of allah.  allah does not fail in [his] 
promise.
21.
do you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky and 
makes it flow as springs [and rivers] in the earth; then he 
produces thereby crops of varying colors; then they dry and you 
see them turned yellow; then he makes them [scattered] debris.  
indeed in that is a reminder for those of understanding.
22.
so is one whose breast allah has expanded to [accept] islam 
and he is upon [i.e., guided by] a light from his lord [like one 
whose heart rejects it]?  then woe to those whose hearts are 
hardened against the remembrance of allah.  those are in 
manifest error.
23.
allah has sent down the best statement:  a consistent book 
wherein is reiteration.  the skins shiver therefrom of those 
who fear their lord; then their skins and their hearts relax at 
the remembrance [i.e., mention] of allah.  that is the guidance
of allah by which he guides whom he wills.  and one whom 
allah leaves astray – for him there is no guide.
                                               
1256i.e., satan or any false object of worship.
1257i.e., elevated rooms, dwellings or palaces.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
458
24.
then is he who will shield with his face1258 the worst of the 
punishment on the day of resurrection [like one secure from 
it]?  and it will be said to the wrongdoers, "taste what you 
used to earn."
25.
those before them denied, and punishment came upon them 
from where they did not perceive.
26.
so allah made them taste disgrace in worldly life.  but the 
punishment of the hereafter is greater, if they only knew.
27.
and we have certainly presented for the people in this quran 
from every [kind of] example – that they might remember.
28.
[it is] an arabic quran, without any deviance1259 that they might
become righteous.1260
29.
allah presents an example:  a man [i.e., slave] owned by 
quarreling partners and another belonging exclusively to one 
man – are they equal in comparison?  praise be to allah!  but 
most of them do not know.
30.
indeed, you are to die, and indeed, they are to die.
31.
then indeed you, on the day of resurrection, before your lord,
will dispute.
32.
so who is more unjust than one who lies about allah and 
denies the truth when it has come to him?  is there not in hell 
a residence for the disbelievers?
33.
and the one who has brought the truth [i.e., the prophet ()] 
and [they who] believed in it – those are the righteous.
34.
they will have whatever they desire with their lord.  that is 
the reward of the doers of good –
35.
that allah may remove from them the worst of what they did 
and reward them their due for the best of what they used to do.
                                               
1258rather than his hands, which will be chained to his neck.
1259from the truth.
1260through consciousness of allah.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
459
36.
is not allah sufficient for his servant [i.e., prophet muhammad
()]?  and [yet], they threaten you with those [they worship] 
other than him.  and whoever allah leaves astray – for him 
there is no guide.
37.
and whoever allah guides – for him there is no misleader.  is 
not allah exalted in might and owner of retribution?
38.
and if you asked them, "who created the heavens and the 
earth?" they would surely say, "allah."  say, "then have you 
considered1261 what you invoke besides allah?  if allah intended
me harm, are they removers of his harm; or if he intended me 
mercy, are they withholders of his mercy?"  say, "sufficient 
for me is allah; upon him [alone] rely the [wise] reliers."
39.
say, "o my people, work according to your position, [for] indeed,
i am working; and you are going to know
40.
to whom will come a torment disgracing him and on whom 
will descend an enduring punishment."
41.
indeed, we sent down to you the book for the people in truth.  
so whoever is guided – it is for [the benefit of] his soul; and 
whoever goes astray only goes astray to its detriment.  and 
you are not a manager [i.e., authority] over them.
42.
allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that 
do not die [he takes] during their sleep.  then he keeps those 
for which he has decreed death and releases the others for a 
specified term.  indeed in that are signs for a people who give 
thought.
43.
or have they taken other than allah as intercessors?  say, 
"even though they do not possess [power over] anything, nor 
do they reason?"
44.
say, "to allah belongs [the right to allow] intercession entirely.  
to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth.  
then to him you will be returned."
                                               
1261i.e., "tell me about..."

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
460
45.
and when allah is mentioned alone, the hearts of those who 
do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion, but when 
those [worshipped] other than him are mentioned, immediately
they rejoice.
46.
say, "o allah, creator of the heavens and the earth, knower 
of the unseen and the witnessed, you will judge between your 
servants concerning that over which they used to differ."
47.
and if those who did wrong had all that is in the earth entirely 
and the like of it with it, they would [attempt to] ransom 
themselves thereby from the worst of the punishment on the 
day of resurrection.  and there will appear to them from 
allah that which they had not taken into account.1262
48.
and there will appear to them the evils they had earned, and 
they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
49.
and when adversity touches man, he calls upon us; then when
we bestow on him a favor from us, he says, "i have only been
given it because of [my] knowledge."  rather, it is a trial, but 
most of them do not know.
50.
those before them had already said it, but they were not availed
by what they used to earn.
51.
and the evil consequences of what they earned struck them.  
and those who have wronged of these [people] will be struck 
[i.e., afflicted] by the evil consequences of what they earned; 
and they will not cause failure.1263
52.
do they not know that allah extends provision for whom he 
wills and restricts [it]?  indeed in that are signs for a people 
who believe.
53.
say, "o my servants who have transgressed against themselves
[by sinning], do not despair of the mercy of allah.  indeed, 
allah forgives all sins.1264  indeed, it is he who is the forgiving, 
the merciful."
                                               
1262of his anger and punishment.
1263i.e., prevent allah from what he wills or escape from the punishment.
1264for those who repent and correct themselves.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
461
54.
and return [in repentance] to your lord and submit to him 
before the punishment comes upon you; then you will not be 
helped.
55.
and follow the best of what was revealed to you from your 
lord [i.e., the quran] before the punishment comes upon you 
suddenly while you do not perceive,
56.
lest a soul should say,1265 "oh, [how great is] my regret over 
what i neglected in regard to allah and that i was among the 
mockers."
57.
or [lest] it say, "if only allah had guided me, i would have 
been among the righteous."
58.
or [lest] it say when it sees the punishment, "if only i had 
another turn1266 so i could be among the doers of good."
59.
but yes, there had come to you my verses, but you denied them
and were arrogant, and you were among the disbelievers.
60.
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied 
about allah [with] their faces blackened.  is there not in hell a 
residence for the arrogant?
61.
and allah will save those who feared him by their attainment;1267
no evil will touch them, nor will they grieve.
62.
allah is the creator of all things, and he is, over all things, 
disposer of affairs.
63.
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth.  and 
they who disbelieve in the verses of allah – it is those who are 
the losers.
64.
say, [o muhammad], "is it other than allah that you order me 
to worship, o ignorant ones?"
65.
and it was already revealed to you and to those before you that 
if you should associate [anything] with allah, your work would
                                               
1265on the day of resurrection.
1266at worldly life.
1267i.e., their success in the trials of worldly life and attainment of paradise.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
462
surely become worthless, and you would surely be among the 
losers.
66.
rather, worship [only] allah and be among the grateful.
67.
they have not appraised allah with true appraisal,1268 while 
the earth entirely will be [within] his grip1269 on the day of 
resurrection, and the heavens will be folded in his right hand.1270  
exalted is he and high above what they associate with him.
68.
and the horn will be blown, and whoever is in the heavens and 
whoever is on the earth will fall dead except whom allah wills.  
then it will be blown again, and at once they will be standing, 
looking on.
69.
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord, and the record
[of deeds] will be placed, and the prophets and the witnesses 
will be brought, and it will be judged between them in truth, 
and they will not be wronged.
70.
and every soul will be fully compensated [for] what it did; 
and he is most knowing1271 of what they do.
71.
and those who disbelieved will be driven to hell in groups until,
when they reach it, its gates are opened and its keepers will say,
"did there not come to you messengers from yourselves, 
reciting to you the verses of your lord and warning you of the 
meeting of this day of yours?"  they will say, "yes, but the 
word [i.e., decree] of punishment has come into effect upon 
the disbelievers."
72.
[to them] it will be said, "enter the gates of hell to abide eternally
therein, and wretched is the residence of the arrogant."
73.
but those who feared their lord will be driven to paradise in 
groups until, when they reach it while its gates have been 
                                               
1268i.e., appreciation of his attributes.
1269literally, "no more than a handful of his."
1270see footnote to 2:19.
1271with no need for any record or witnesses, which are but means to 
establish proof to the soul itself in addition to its own knowledge of 
what it has done.

surah 39 – az-zumar
juz 24
463
opened and its keepers say, "peace be upon you; you have 
become pure; so enter it to abide eternally therein," [they will 
enter].1272
74.
and they will say, "praise to allah, who has fulfilled for us 
his promise and made us inherit the earth [so] we may settle 
in paradise wherever we will.  and excellent is the reward of 
[righteous] workers."
75.
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne, exalting 
[allah] with praise of their lord.  and it will be judged between
them in truth, and it will be said, "[all] praise to allah, lord 
of the worlds."
                                               
1272in such honor and joy that is beyond description – thus, the omission of 
this conclusion in the arabic text.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
464
surah ghafir
1273
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. ha, meem.1274
2. the revelation of the book [i.e., the quran] is from allah, the 
exalted in might, the knowing,
3. the forgiver of sin, acceptor of repentance, severe in punishment,
owner of abundance.  there is no deity except him; to him is 
the destination.
4. no one disputes concerning the signs of allah except those who 
disbelieve, so be not deceived by their [uninhibited] movement 
throughout the land.
5. the people of noah denied before them and the [disbelieving] 
factions after them, and every nation intended [a plot] for their 
messenger to seize him, and they disputed by [using] falsehood 
to [attempt to] invalidate thereby the truth.  so i seized them, 
and how [terrible] was my penalty.
6. and thus has the word [i.e., decree] of your lord come into effect
upon those who disbelieved that they are companions of the fire.
7. those [angels] who carry the throne and those around it exalt 
[allah] with praise of their lord and believe in him and ask 
forgiveness for those who have believed, [saying], "our lord, 
you have encompassed all things in mercy and knowledge, so 
forgive those who have repented and followed your way and 
protect them from the punishment of hellfire.
8. our lord, and admit them to gardens of perpetual residence 
which you have promised them and whoever was righteous 
among their fathers, their spouses and their offspring.  indeed, it 
is you who is the exalted in might, the wise.
                                               
1273ghafir:  the forgiver, i.e., allah (subhanahu wa taala).  this surah is 
also known as al-mumin (the believer).
1274see footnote to 2:1.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
465
9.
and protect them from the evil consequences [of their deeds].  
and he whom you protect from evil consequences that day –
you will have given him mercy.  and that is the great attainment."
10.
indeed, those who disbelieve will be addressed, "the hatred of
allah for you was [even] greater than your hatred of yourselves
[this day in hell] when you were invited to faith, but you 
disbelieved [i.e., refused]."
11.
they will say, "our lord, you made us lifeless twice and gave
us life twice, and we have confessed our sins.  so is there to 
an exit any way?"
12.
[they will be told], "that is because, when allah was called upon
alone, you disbelieved; but if others were associated with him,
you believed.  so the judgement is with allah, the most high, 
the grand."
13.
it is he who shows you his signs and sends down to you from 
the sky, provision.  but none will remember except he who 
turns back [in repentance].
14.
so invoke allah, [being] sincere to him in religion, although 
the disbelievers dislike it.
15.
[he is] the exalted above [all] degrees, owner of the throne; 
he places the inspiration of his command [i.e., revelation] 
upon whom he wills of his servants to warn of the day of 
meeting.
16.
the day they come forth nothing concerning them will be 
concealed from allah.  to whom belongs [all] sovereignty 
this day?  to allah, the one, the prevailing.
17.
this day every soul will be recompensed for what it earned.  
no injustice today!  indeed, allah is swift in account.
18.
and warn them, [o muhammad], of the approaching day, 
when hearts are at the throats, filled [with distress].  for the 
wrongdoers there will be no devoted friend and no intercessor 
[who is] obeyed.
19.
he knows that which deceives the eyes and what the breasts 
conceal.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
466
20.
and allah judges with truth, while those they invoke besides him 
judge not with anything.  indeed, allah – he is the hearing, 
the seeing.
21.
have they not traveled through the land and observed how 
was the end of those who were before them?  they were 
greater than them in strength and in impression on the land, 
but allah seized them for their sins.  and they had not from 
allah any protector.
22.
that was because their messengers were coming to them with 
clear proofs, but they disbelieved, so allah seized them.  indeed,
he is powerful and severe in punishment.
23.
and we did certainly send moses with our signs and a clear 
authority
24.
to pharaoh, haman and qarun, but they said, "[he is] a 
magician and a liar."
25.
and when he brought them the truth from us, they said, "kill 
the sons of those who have believed with him and keep their 
women alive."  but the plan of the disbelievers is not except in 
error.
26.
and pharaoh said, "let me kill moses and let him call upon 
his lord.  indeed, i fear that he will change your religion or 
that he will cause corruption1275 in the land."
27.
but moses said, "indeed, i have sought refuge in my lord and 
your lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in 
the day of account."
28.
and a believing man from the family of pharaoh who concealed
his faith said, "do you kill a man [merely] because he says, 
'my lord is allah' while he has brought you clear proofs from 
your lord?  and if he should be lying, then upon him is [the 
consequence of] his lie; but if he should be truthful, there will 
strike you some of what he promises you.  indeed, allah does 
not guide one who is a transgressor and a liar.
                                               
1275i.e., dissension or civil strife.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
467
29.
o my people, sovereignty is yours today, [your being] dominant
in the land.  but who would protect us from the punishment of 
allah if it came to us?"  pharaoh said, "i do not show you 
except what i see, and i do not guide you except to the way of 
right conduct."
30.
and he who believed said, "o my people, indeed i fear for 
you [a fate] like the day of the companies1276 –
31.
like the custom of the people of noah and of aad and thamud
and those after them.  and allah wants no injustice for [his] 
servants.
32.
and o my people, indeed i fear for you the day of calling1277 –
33.
the day you will turn your backs fleeing; there is not for you 
from allah any protector.  and whoever allah leaves astray –
there is not for him any guide.
34.
and joseph had already come to you before with clear proofs, 
but you remained in doubt of that which he brought to you, until 
when he died, you said, 'never will allah send a messenger after
him.'  thus does allah leave astray he who is a transgressor 
and skeptic."
35.
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah without an 
authority having come to them – great is hatred [of them] in 
the sight of allah and in the sight of those who have believed.  
thus does allah seal over every heart [belonging to] an arrogant
tyrant.
36.
and pharaoh said, "o haman, construct for me a tower that i 
might reach the ways1278 –
37.
the ways into the heavens – so that i may look at the deity of 
moses; but indeed, i think he is a liar."  and thus was made 
                                               
1276i.e., the days on which allah sent his punishment upon those who 
rejected their prophets in former times.
1277i.e., the day of judgement, when the criminals will cry out in terror, the 
people will call to each other (see 7:44-51), and the angels will call out 
the results of each person's judgement.
1278means of ascent, pathways.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
468
attractive to pharaoh the evil of his deed, and he was averted 
from the [right] way.  and the plan of pharaoh was not except 
in ruin.
38.
and he who believed said, "o my people, follow me; i will 
guide you to the way of right conduct.
39.
o my people, this worldly life is only [temporary] enjoyment, 
and indeed, the hereafter – that is the home of [permanent] 
settlement.
40.
whoever does an evil deed will not be recompensed except by 
the like thereof; but whoever does righteousness, whether male 
or female, while he is a believer – those will enter paradise,
being given provision therein without account.
41.
and o my people, how is it that i invite you to salvation while 
you invite me to the fire? 
42.
you invite me to disbelieve in allah and associate with him 
that of which i have no knowledge, and i invite you to the 
exalted in might, the perpetual forgiver.
43.
assuredly, that to which you invite me has no [response to a] 
supplication in this world or in the hereafter; and indeed, our 
return is to allah, and indeed, the transgressors will be 
companions of the fire.
44.
and you will remember what i [now] say to you, and i entrust 
my affair to allah.  indeed, allah is seeing of [his] servants."
45.
so allah protected him from the evils they plotted, and the 
people of pharaoh were enveloped by the worst of punishment –
46.
the fire; they are exposed to it morning and evening.1279  and 
the day the hour appears [it will be said], "make the people 
of pharaoh enter the severest punishment."
47.
and [mention] when they will argue within the fire, and the 
weak will say to those who had been arrogant, "indeed, we 
                                               
1279from the time of their death until the day of resurrection, when they 
will be driven into it.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
469
were [only] your followers, so will you relieve us of a share of 
the fire?"
48.
those who had been arrogant will say, "indeed, all [of us] are 
in it.  indeed, allah has judged between the servants."
49.
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell, "supplicate 
your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment."
50.
they will say, "did there not come to you your messengers 
with clear proofs?"  they will say, "yes."  they will reply, 
"then supplicate [yourselves], but the supplication of the 
disbelievers is not except in error [i.e., futility]."
51.
indeed, we will support our messengers and those who 
believe during the life of this world and on the day when the 
witnesses will stand –
52.
the day their excuse will not benefit the wrongdoers, and 
they will have the curse, and they will have the worst home 
[i.e., hell].
53.
and we had certainly given moses guidance, and we caused 
the children of israel to inherit the scripture
54.
as guidance and a reminder for those of understanding.
55.
so be patient, [o muhammad].  indeed, the promise of allah 
is truth.  and ask forgiveness for your sin1280 and exalt [allah] 
with praise of your lord in the evening and the morning.
56.
indeed, those who dispute concerning the signs of allah without
[any] authority having come to them – there is not within their 
breasts except pride, [the extent of] which they cannot reach.  
so seek refuge in allah.  indeed, it is he who is the hearing, 
the seeing.
57.
the creation of the heavens and earth is greater than the creation
of mankind, but most of the people do not know.
                                               
1280what is intended is "fault" or "error" in judgement, since all prophets 
were protected by allah from falling into sin.  the implication is that all 
believers should seek forgiveness for their sins.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
470
58.
and not equal are the blind and the seeing, nor are those who 
believe and do righteous deeds and the evildoer.  little do you 
remember.
59.
indeed, the hour is coming – no doubt about it – but most of 
the people do not believe.
60.
and your lord says, "call upon me; i will respond to you."  
indeed, those who disdain my worship will enter hell [rendered] 
contemptible.
61.
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest 
therein and the day giving sight.1281  indeed, allah is full of 
bounty to the people, but most of the people are not grateful.
62.
that is allah, your lord, creator of all things; there is no deity
except him, so how are you deluded?
63.
thus were those [before you] deluded who were rejecting the 
signs of allah.
64.
it is allah who made for you the earth a place of settlement and
the sky a structure [i.e., ceiling] and formed you and perfected 
your forms and provided you with good things.  that is allah, 
your lord; then blessed is allah, lord of the worlds.
65.
he is the ever-living; there is no deity except him, so call upon
him, [being] sincere to him in religion.  [all] praise is [due] 
to allah, lord of the worlds.
66.
say, [o muhammad], "indeed, i have been forbidden to worship
those you call upon besides allah once the clear proofs have 
come to me from my lord, and i have been commanded to 
submit to the lord of the worlds."
67.
it is he who created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, 
then from a clinging clot; then he brings you out as a child; 
then [he develops you] that you reach your [time of] maturity, 
then [further] that you become elders.  and among you is he 
who is taken in death before [that], so that you reach a specified
term;1282 and perhaps you will use reason.
                                               
1281i.e., making things visible.
1282the time decreed for your death.

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
471
68.
he it is who gives life and causes death; and when he decrees 
a matter, he but says to it, "be," and it is.
69.
do you not consider those who dispute concerning the signs 
of allah – how are they averted?
70.
those who deny the book [i.e., the quran] and that with which
we sent our messengers – they are going to know,
71.
when the shackles are around their necks and the chains; they 
will be dragged
72.
in boiling water; then in the fire they will be filled [with flame].
73.
then it will be said to them, "where is that which you used to 
associate [with him in worship]
74.
other than allah?"  they will say, "they have departed from 
us; rather, we did not used to invoke previously anything."  
thus does allah put astray the disbelievers.
75.
[the angels will say], "that was because you used to exult upon
the earth without right and you used to behave insolently.
76.
enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein, and wretched 
is the residence of the arrogant."
77.
so be patient, [o muhammad]; indeed, the promise of allah is 
truth.  and whether we show you some of what we have 
promised them or we take you in death, it is to us they will 
be returned.
78.
and we have already sent messengers before you.  among 
them are those [whose stories] we have related to you, and 
among them are those [whose stories] we have not related to 
you.  and it was not for any messenger to bring a sign [or verse] 
except by permission of allah.  so when the command of allah
comes, it will be concluded [i.e., judged] in truth, and the falsifiers
will thereupon lose [all].
79.
it is allah who made for you the grazing animals upon which 
you ride, and some of them you eat.
80.
and for you therein are [other] benefits and that you may 

surah 40 – ghafir
juz 24
472
realize upon them a need which is in your breasts;1283 and 
upon them and upon ships you are carried.
81.
and he shows you his signs.  so which of the signs of allah 
do you deny?
82.
have they not traveled through the land and observed how 
was the end of those before them?  they were more numerous 
than themselves and greater in strength and in impression on 
the land, but they were not availed by what they used to earn.
83.
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs, 
they [merely] rejoiced in what they had of knowledge, but 
they were enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
84.
and when they saw our punishment, they said, "we believe in 
allah alone and disbelieve in that which we used to associate
with him."
85.
but never did their faith benefit them once they saw our 
punishment.  [it is] the established way of allah which has 
preceded among his servants.  and the disbelievers thereupon 
lost [all].
                                               
1283i.e., that you may use the animals to carry your loads to distant places, 
according to need.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 24
473
surah fussilat
1284
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
ha, meem.1285
2.
[this is] a revelation from the entirely merciful, the especially
merciful –
3.
a book whose verses have been detailed, an arabic quran1286
for a people who know,
4.
as a giver of good tidings and a warner; but most of them turn 
away, so they do not hear.
5.
and they say, "our hearts are within coverings [i.e., screened] 
from that to which you invite us, and in our ears is deafness, 
and between us and you is a partition, so work;1287 indeed, we
are working."
6.
say, [o muhammad], "i am only a man like you to whom it 
has been revealed that your god is but one god; so take a 
straight course to him and seek his forgiveness."  and woe to 
those who associate others with allah –
7.
those who do not give zakah, and in the hereafter they are 
disbelievers.
8.
indeed, those who believe and do righteous deeds – for them 
is a reward uninterrupted.
9.
say, "do you indeed disbelieve in he who created the earth in 
two days and attribute to him equals?  that is the lord of the 
worlds."
10.
and he placed on it [i.e., the earth] firmly set mountains 
over its surface, and he blessed it and determined therein its 
                                               
1284fussilat:  they (i.e., allah's verses) have been detailed or presented in 
detail.  the surah is also referred to as ha meem as-sajdah.
1285see footnote to 2:1.
1286i.e., revealed in the arabic language.
1287for your own religion or work against us.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 24
474
[creatures'] sustenance in four days without distinction1288 –
for [the information of] those who ask.
11.
then he directed himself1289 to the heaven while it was smoke 
and said to it and to the earth, "come [into being],1290 willingly 
or by compulsion."  they said, "we have come willingly."
12.
and he completed them as seven heavens within two days 
and inspired [i.e., made known] in each heaven its command.  
and we adorned the nearest heaven with lamps [i.e., stars, for 
beauty] and as protection.1291  that is the determination of the 
exalted in might, the knowing.
13.
but if they turn away, then say, "i have warned you of a
thunderbolt like the thunderbolt [that struck] aad and thamud.
14.
[that occurred] when the messengers had come to them before
them and after them, [saying], "worship not except allah."  
they said, "if our lord had willed,1292 he would have sent 
down the angels, so indeed we, in that with which you have 
been sent, are disbelievers."
15.
as for aad, they were arrogant upon the earth without right 
and said, "who is greater than us in strength?"  did they not 
consider that allah who created them was greater than them in 
strength?  but they were rejecting our signs.
16.
so we sent upon them a screaming wind during days of 
misfortune to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in 
the worldly life; but the punishment of the hereafter is more 
disgracing, and they will not be helped.
17.
and as for thamud, we guided them, but they preferred blindness
over guidance, so the thunderbolt of humiliating punishment 
seized them for what they used to earn.
18.
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah.
                                               
1288also "four equal days" or "four days of completion."
1289see footnote to 2:19.
1290literally, "become" or "do [as commanded]."
1291from the devils who attempt to steal information from the angels.
1292to send messengers.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 24
475
19.
and [mention, o muhammad], the day when the enemies of 
allah will be gathered to the fire while they are [driven], 
assembled in rows,
20.
until, when they reach it, their hearing and their eyes and their 
skins will testify against them of what they used to do.
21.
and they will say to their skins, "why have you testified against
us?"  they will say, "we were made to speak by allah, who 
has made everything speak; and he created you the first time, 
and to him you are returned.
22.
and you were not covering [i.e., protecting] yourselves,1293
lest your hearing testify against you or your sight or your skins,
but you assumed that allah does not know much of what you do.
23.
and that was your assumption which you assumed about your 
lord.  it has brought you to ruin, and you have become among 
the losers."
24.
so [even] if they are patient, the fire is a residence for them; 
and if they ask to appease [allah], they will not be of those 
who are allowed to appease.
25.
and we appointed for them companions1294 who made
attractive to them what was before them and what was behind 
them [of sin], and the word [i.e., decree] has come into effect 
upon them among nations which had passed on before them of 
jinn and men.  indeed, they [all] were losers.
26.
and those who disbelieve say, "do not listen to this quran 
and speak noisily1295 during [the recitation of] it that perhaps 
you will overcome."
27.
but we will surely cause those who disbelieve to taste a 
severe punishment, and we will surely recompense them for 
the worst of what they had been doing.
                                               
1293with righteousness or by fearing allah.
1294in this world among the evil jinn and men.
1295other meanings include "speak improperly" and/or "make a clamor."  
the purpose of this was to prevent the hearing or understanding of the 
quran.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 24
476
28.
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah – the fire.  
for them therein is the home of eternity as recompense for 
what they, of our verses, were rejecting.
29.
and those who disbelieved will [then] say, "our lord, show 
us those who misled us of the jinn and men [so] we may put 
them under our feet1296 that they will be among the lowest."
30.
indeed, those who have said, "our lord is allah" and then
remained on a right course – the angels will descend upon them, 
[saying], "do not fear and do not grieve but receive good tidings
of paradise, which you were promised.
31.
we [angels] were your allies in worldly life and [are so] in the 
hereafter.  and you will have therein whatever your souls 
desire, and you will have therein whatever you request [or wish]
32.
as accommodation from a [lord who is] forgiving and 
merciful."
33.
and who is better in speech than one who invites to allah and 
does righteousness and says, "indeed, i am of the muslims."
34.
and not equal are the good deed and the bad.  repel [evil] by 
that [deed] which is better; and thereupon, the one whom 
between you and him is enmity [will become] as though he 
was a devoted friend.
35.
but none is granted it except those who are patient, and none 
is granted it except one having a great portion [of good].
36.
and if there comes to you from satan an evil suggestion, then 
seek refuge in allah.  indeed, he is the hearing, the knowing.
37.
and of his signs are the night and day and the sun and moon.  
do not prostrate to the sun or to the moon, but prostrate to allah, 
who created them, if it should be him that you worship.1297
38.
but if they are arrogant – then those who are near your lord 
                                               
1296in the lowest depths of hell.  or "that we may step on them" in revenge.
1297i.e., do not worship allah through his creations but worship him directly
and exclusively.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 24
477
[i.e., the angels] exalt him by night and by day, and they do 
not become weary.
39.
and of his signs is that you see the earth stilled, but when we 
send down upon it rain, it quivers and grows.  indeed, he who 
has given it life is the giver of life to the dead.  indeed, he is 
over all things competent.
40.
indeed, those who inject deviation into our verses1298 are not 
concealed from us.  so, is he who is cast into the fire better 
or he who comes secure on the day of resurrection?  do 
whatever you will; indeed, he is seeing of what you do.
41.
indeed, those who disbelieve in the message [i.e., the quran]1299
after it has come to them...1300  and indeed, it is a mighty1301
book.
42.
falsehood cannot approach it from before it or from behind it; 
[it is] a revelation from a [lord who is] wise and praiseworthy.
43.
nothing is said to you, [o muhammad], except what was 
already said to the messengers before you.  indeed, your lord 
is a possessor of forgiveness and a possessor of painful penalty.
44.
and if we had made it a foreign [i.e., non-arabic] quran, 
they would have said, "why are its verses not explained in 
detail [in our language]?  is it a foreign [recitation] and an 
arab [messenger]?"  say, "it is, for those who believe, a 
guidance and cure."  and those who do not believe – in their 
ears is deafness, and it is upon them blindness.  those are 
being called from a distant place.1302
45.
and we had already given moses the scripture, but it came 
under disagreement.1303  and if not for a word [i.e., decree]1304
                                               
1298through deviant recitations or interpretations.
1299i.e., reject it or prefer deviant interpretation.
1300the conclusion is understood to be "...will have earned an indescribable 
punishment."
1301inimitable, resistant to attack, protected by allah.
1302for all practical purposes, since they neither hear nor understand.
1303an alternative meaning is "he was opposed over it."
1304see footnote to 10:19.

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 25
478
that preceded from your lord, it would have been concluded 
between them.  and indeed they are, concerning it [i.e., the 
quran], in disquieting doubt.
46.
whoever does righteousness – it is for his [own] soul; and 
whoever does evil [does so] against it.  and your lord is not 
ever unjust to [his] servants.
47.
to him [alone] is attributed knowledge of the hour.  and fruits 
emerge not from their coverings nor does a female conceive 
or give birth except with his knowledge.  and the day he 
will call to them, "where are my 'partners'?" they will say, 
"we announce to you that there is [no longer] among us any 
witness [to that]."
48.
and lost from them will be those they were invoking before, 
and they will be certain that they have no place of escape.
49.
man is not weary of supplication for good [things], but if evil 
touches him, he is hopeless and despairing.
50.
and if we let him taste mercy from us after an adversity which
has touched him, he will surely say, "this is [due] to me,1305
and i do not think the hour will occur; and [even] if i should 
be returned to my lord, indeed, for me there will be with him 
the best."  but we will surely inform those who disbelieved 
about what they did, and we will surely make them taste a 
massive punishment.
51.
and when we bestow favor upon man, he turns away and 
distances himself; but when evil touches him, then he is full of 
extensive supplication.
52.
say, "have you considered:  if it [i.e., the quran] is from 
allah and you disbelieved in it, who would be more astray 
than one who is in extreme dissension?"
53.
we will show them our signs in the horizons and within
themselves until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth.1306  
                                               
1305because of my effort, knowledge, excellence, etc.
1306or "that he (subhanahu wa taala) is the truth."

surah 41 – fussilat
juz 25
479
but is it not sufficient concerning your lord that he is, over 
all things, a witness?
54.
unquestionably, they are in doubt about the meeting with their
lord.  unquestionably he is, of all things, encompassing.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
480
surah ash-shura
1307
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. ha, meem.
2. ayn, seen, qaf.1308
3. thus has he revealed to you, [o muhammad], and to those 
before you – allah, the exalted in might, the wise.
4. to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in 
the earth, and he is the most high, the most great.
5. the heavens almost break from above them,1309 and the angels 
exalt [allah] with praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for 
those on earth.  unquestionably, it is allah who is the forgiving, 
the merciful.
6. and those who take as allies other than him – allah is [yet] 
guardian over them; and you, [o muhammad], are not over 
them a manager.
7. and thus we have revealed to you an arabic quran that you 
may warn the mother of cities [i.e., makkah] and those around 
it1310 and warn of the day of assembly, about which there is no 
doubt.  a party will be in paradise and a party in the blaze.
8. and if allah willed, he could have made them [of] one religion, 
but he admits whom he wills1311 into his mercy.  and the 
wrongdoers have not any protector or helper.
9. or have they taken protectors [or allies] besides him?  but allah –
he is the protector, and he gives life to the dead, and he is over 
all things competent.
                                               
1307ash-shura:  consultation.
1308see footnote to 2:1.
1309i.e., from the grandeur of allah (subhanahu wa taala) above them.
1310i.e., all other peoples.
1311i.e., those who desire his guidance and his acceptance of them.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
481
10.
and in anything over which you disagree – its ruling is [to be 
referred] to allah.  [say], "that is allah, my lord; upon him 
i have relied, and to him i turn back."1312
11.
[he is] creator of the heavens and the earth.  he has made for 
you from yourselves, mates, and among the cattle, mates; he 
multiplies you thereby.  there is nothing like unto him,1313
and he is the hearing, the seeing.
12.
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth.  he 
extends provision for whom he wills and restricts [it].  indeed 
he is, of all things, knowing.
13.
he has ordained for you of religion what he enjoined upon 
noah and that which we have revealed to you, [o muhammad], 
and what we enjoined upon ibrahim and moses and jesus –
to establish the religion and not be divided therein.  difficult 
for those who associate others with allah is that to which you 
invite them.  allah chooses for himself whom he wills and 
guides to himself whoever turns back [to him].
14.
and they did not become divided until after knowledge had 
come to them – out of jealous animosity between themselves.  
and if not for a word1314 that preceded from your lord 
[postponing the penalty] until a specified time, it would have 
been concluded between them.  and indeed, those who were 
granted inheritance of the scripture after them are, concerning 
it, in disquieting doubt.
15.
so to that [religion of allah] invite, [o muhammad],1315 and 
remain on a right course as you are commanded and do not 
follow their inclinations but say, "i have believed in what allah
has revealed of scripture [i.e., the quran], and i have been 
commanded to do justice among you.  allah is our lord and 
                                               
1312in remembrance and repentance.
1313there is no similarity whatsoever between the creator and his creation 
in essence, in attributes or in deed.
1314decree.  see footnote to 10:19.
1315another meaning understood from the arabic is "so because of that 
[division and separation into sects], invite [them back to allah]..."

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
482
your lord.  for us are our deeds, and for you your deeds.1316  
there is no [need for] argument between us and you.1317  allah 
will bring us together, and to him is the [final] destination."
16.
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been 
responded to1318 – their argument is invalid with their lord, and 
upon them is [his] wrath, and for them is a severe punishment.
17.
it is allah who has sent down the book in truth and [also] the 
balance [i.e., justice].  and what will make you perceive?  
perhaps the hour is near.
18.
those who do not believe in it are impatient for it,1319 but 
those who believe are fearful of it and know that it is the truth.  
unquestionably, those who dispute concerning the hour are in 
extreme error.
19.
allah is subtle [i.e., gentle] with his servants; he gives provision 
to whom he wills.  and he is the powerful, the exalted in might.
20.
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter – we increase 
for him in his harvest [i.e., reward].  and whoever desires the 
harvest [i.e., benefits] of this world – we give him thereof, but 
there is not for him in the hereafter any share.
21.
or have they partners [i.e., other deities] who have ordained 
for them a religion to which allah has not consented?  but if 
not for the decisive word,1320 it would have been concluded 
between them.  and indeed, the wrongdoers will have a painful 
punishment.
22.
you will see the wrongdoers fearful of what they have earned, 
and it will [certainly] befall them.  and those who have believed
and done righteous deeds will be in lush regions of the gardens
                                               
1316i.e., the consequences thereof.
1317since the truth has been made clear and since those who refuse it do so 
only out of stubbornness or worldly interests.
1318i.e., after people have accepted the truth from allah, in an attempt to 
turn the believers away from his religion of islam.
1319they had challenged the prophet () to bring it on immediately.
1320decree.  see footnote to 10:19.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
483
[in paradise] having whatever they will in the presence of 
their lord.  that is what is the great bounty.
23.
it is that of which allah gives good tidings to his servants 
who believe and do righteous deeds.  say, [o muhammad], "i 
do not ask you for it [i.e., this message] any payment [but] 
only good will through [i.e., due to] kinship."  and whoever 
commits a good deed – we will increase for him good therein.  
indeed, allah is forgiving and appreciative.
24.
or do they say, "he has invented about allah a lie"?  but if 
allah willed, he could seal over your heart.1321  and allah 
eliminates falsehood and establishes the truth by his words.  
indeed, he is knowing of that within the breasts.
25.
and it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and 
pardons misdeeds, and he knows what you do.
26.
and he answers [the supplication of] those who have believed 
and done righteous deeds and increases [for] them from his 
bounty.  but the disbelievers will have a severe punishment.
27.
and if allah had extended [excessively] provision for his 
servants, they would have committed tyranny throughout the 
earth.  but he sends [it] down in an amount which he wills.  
indeed he is, of his servants, acquainted and seeing.
28.
and it is he who sends down the rain after they had despaired and 
spreads his mercy.  and he is the protector, the praiseworthy.
29.
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and 
what he has dispersed throughout them of creatures.  and he, 
for gathering them when he wills, is competent.
30.
and whatever strikes you of disaster – it is for what your hands
have earned; but he pardons much.
31.
and you will not cause failure [to allah]1322 upon the earth.  
and you have not besides allah any protector or helper.
                                               
1321i.e., he could make you forget the quran and deprive you of it.
1322i.e., escape from him.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
484
32.
and of his signs are the ships in the sea, like mountains.
33.
if he willed, he could still the wind, and they would remain
motionless on its surface.  indeed in that are signs for everyone
patient and grateful.
34.
or he could destroy them1323 for what they earned; but he 
pardons much.
35.
and [that is so] those who dispute concerning our signs may 
know that for them there is no place of escape.
36.
so whatever thing you have been given – it is but [for] 
enjoyment of the worldly life.  but what is with allah is better 
and more lasting for those who have believed and upon their 
lord rely
37.
and those who avoid the major sins and immoralities, and 
when they are angry, they forgive,
38.
and those who have responded to their lord and established 
prayer and whose affair is [determined by] consultation among 
themselves, and from what we have provided them, they spend,
39.
and those who, when tyranny strikes them, they defend 
themselves.1324
40.
and the retribution for an evil act is an evil one like it, but 
whoever pardons and makes reconciliation – his reward is 
[due] from allah.  indeed, he does not like wrongdoers.
41.
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged –
those have not upon them any cause [for blame].
42.
the cause is only against the ones who wrong the people and 
tyrannize upon the earth without right.  those will have a 
painful punishment.
43.
and whoever is patient and forgives – indeed, that is of the 
matters [worthy] of resolve.1325
                                               
1323meaning that allah could sink the ships by means of violent winds.
1324or avenge themselves in a just manner, restoring their rights and not 
allowing aggressors to take advantage of them out of weakness.
1325on the part of those seeking the reward of allah.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
485
44.
and he whom allah sends astray – for him there is no protector 
beyond him.  and you will see the wrongdoers, when they see 
the punishment, saying, "is there for return [to the former world]
any way?"
45.
and you will see them being exposed to it [i.e., the fire], 
humbled from humiliation, looking from [behind] a covert 
glance.  and those who had believed will say, "indeed, the
[true] losers are the ones who lost themselves and their families 
on the day of resurrection.  unquestionably, the wrongdoers 
are in an enduring punishment."
46.
and there will not be for them any allies to aid them other 
than allah.  and whoever allah sends astray – for him there is 
no way.
47.
respond to your lord before a day comes from allah of 
which there is no repelling.  no refuge will you have that day, 
nor for you will there be any denial.1326
48.
but if they turn away – then we have not sent you, [o 
muhammad], over them as a guardian; upon you is only [the 
duty of] notification.  and indeed, when we let man taste 
mercy from us, he rejoices in it; but if evil afflicts him for 
what his hands have put forth, then indeed, man is ungrateful.
49.
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth; 
he creates what he wills.  he gives to whom he wills female 
[children], and he gives to whom he wills males.
50.
or he makes them [both] males and females, and he renders 
whom he wills barren.  indeed, he is knowing and competent.
51.
and it is not for any human being that allah should speak to 
him except by revelation or from behind a partition or that he 
sends a messenger [i.e., angel] to reveal, by his permission, 
what he wills.  indeed, he is most high and wise.
52.
and thus we have revealed to you an inspiration of our 
                                               
1326of your sins or "disapproval" of your punishment.

surah 42 – ash-shura
juz 25
486
command [i.e., the quran].  you did not know what is the 
book or [what is] faith, but we have made it a light by which 
we guide whom we will of our servants.  and indeed, [o 
muhammad], you guide to a straight path –
53.
the path of allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens
and whatever is on the earth.  unquestionably, to allah do 
[all] matters evolve [i.e., return].

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
487
surah az-zukhruf
1327
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
ha, meem.1328
2.
by the clear book,
3.
indeed, we have made it an arabic quran that you might 
understand.
4.
and indeed it is, in the mother of the book1329 with us, 
exalted and full of wisdom.1330
5.
then should we turn the message away, disregarding you, 
because you are a transgressing people?
6.
and how many a prophet we sent among the former peoples,
7.
but there would not come to them a prophet except that they 
used to ridicule him.
8.
and we destroyed greater than them1331 in [striking] power, 
and the example of the former peoples has preceded.
9.
and if you should ask them, "who has created the heavens 
and the earth?" they would surely say, "they were created by 
the exalted in might, the knowing,"
10.
[the one] who has made for you the earth a bed and made for 
you upon it roads that you might be guided
11.
and who sends down rain from the sky in measured amounts, 
and we revive thereby a dead land – thus will you be brought 
forth –
12.
and who created the species, all of them, and has made for 
you of ships and animals those which you mount
                                               
1327az-zukhruf:  ornament, originally meaning gold but including other 
types of decoration.
1328see footnote to 2:1.
1329i.e., the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth).
1330also, "precise" or "specific."
1331the disbelievers of the quraysh, who denied prophet muhammad ().

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
488
13.
that you may settle yourselves upon their backs and then 
remember the favor of your lord when you have settled upon 
them and say, "exalted is he who has subjected this to us, and 
we could not have [otherwise] subdued it.1332
14.
and indeed we, to our lord, will [surely] return."
15.
but they have attributed to him from his servants a portion.1333  
indeed, man is clearly ungrateful.
16.
or has he taken, out of what he has created, daughters and 
chosen you for [having] sons?
17.
and when one of them is given good tidings of that which he 
attributes to the most merciful in comparison [i.e., a daughter],
his face becomes dark, and he suppresses grief.
18.
so is one brought up in ornaments while being during conflict 
unevident1334 [attributed to allah]?
19.
and they have made the angels, who are servants of the most 
merciful, females.  did they witness their creation?  their 
testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned.
20.
and they said, "if the most merciful had willed, we would not 
have worshipped them."  they have of that no knowledge.  
they are not but falsifying.
21.
or have we given them a book before it [i.e., the quran] to 
which they are adhering?
22.
rather, they say, "indeed, we found our fathers upon a religion,
and we are in their footsteps [rightly] guided."
23.
and similarly, we did not send before you any warner into a 
city except that its affluent said, "indeed, we found our fathers 
upon a religion, and we are, in their footsteps, following."
                                               
1332literally, "made it a companion" or "made it compatible."
1333by claiming that he (subhanahu wa taala) has a son or daughters, as it 
is said that a child is part of his parent.  this concept is totally incompatible
with allah's unity and exclusiveness.
1334not "obvious" or "distinct" in an argument.  or not "seen," i.e., absent 
from battles.  the reference is to a daughter.

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
489
24.
[each warner] said, "even if i brought you better guidance 
than that [religion] upon which you found your fathers?"  
they said, "indeed we, in that with which you were sent, are 
disbelievers."
25.
so we took retribution from them; then see how was the end 
of the deniers.
26.
and [mention, o muhammad], when ibrahim said to his father
and his people, "indeed, i am disassociated from that which 
you worship
27.
except for he who created me; and indeed, he will guide me."
28.
and he made it1335 a word remaining among his descendants 
that they might return [to it].
29.
however, i gave enjoyment to these [people of makkah] and 
their fathers1336 until there came to them the truth and a clear 
messenger.1337
30.
but when the truth came to them, they said, "this is magic, 
and indeed we are, concerning it, disbelievers."
31.
and they said, "why was this quran not sent down upon a 
great man from [one of] the two cities?"1338
32.
do they distribute the mercy of your lord?  it is we who have 
apportioned among them their livelihood in the life of this 
world and have raised some of them above others in degrees 
[of rank] that they may make use of one another for service.  
but the mercy of your lord is better than whatever they 
accumulate.
33.
and if it were not that the people would become one 
community [of disbelievers],1339 we would have made for 
                                               
1335i.e., his testimony that none is worthy of worship except allah.
1336the descendants of ibrahim.
1337i.e., one who is obvious with a clear message, meaning muhammad ().
1338referring to makkah and a‹-taif.
1339who assumed that allah's generosity to them was a sign of his approval 
or who would hasten to disbelief in order to obtain wealth.

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
490
those who disbelieve in the most merciful – for their houses –
ceilings and stairways of silver upon which to mount
34.
and for their houses – doors and couches [of silver] upon 
which to recline
35.
and gold ornament.  but all that is not but the enjoyment of 
worldly life.  and the hereafter with your lord is for the 
righteous.
36.
and whoever is blinded from remembrance of the most 
merciful – we appoint for him a devil, and he is to him a 
companion.
37.
and indeed, they [i.e., the devils] avert them from the way [of 
guidance] while they think that they are [rightly] guided
38.
until, when he comes to us [at judgement], he says [to his 
companion], "oh, i wish there was between me and you the
distance between the east and west – how wretched a companion."
39.
and never will it benefit you that day, when you have wronged,
that you are [all] sharing in the punishment.
40.
then will you make the deaf hear, [o muhammad], or guide 
the blind or he who is in clear error?
41.
and whether [or not] we take you away [in death], indeed, 
we will take retribution upon them.
42.
or whether [or not] we show you that which we have promised
them, indeed, we are perfect in ability.
43.
so adhere to that which is revealed to you.  indeed, you are on 
a straight path.
44.
and indeed, it is a remembrance1340 for you and your people, 
and you [all] are going to be questioned.
45.
and ask those we sent before you of our messengers; have 
we made besides the most merciful deities to be worshipped?
46.
and certainly did we send moses with our signs to pharaoh
                                               
1340i.e., an honor.  or "a reminder."

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
491
and his establishment, and he said, "indeed, i am the messenger
of the lord of the worlds."
47.
but when he brought them our signs, at once they laughed at 
them.
48.
and we showed them not a sign except that it was greater 
than its sister, and we seized them with affliction that perhaps 
they might return [to faith].
49.
and they said [to moses], "o magician, invoke for us your lord 
by what he has promised you.  indeed, we will be guided."
50.
but when we removed from them the affliction, at once they 
broke their word.
51.
and pharaoh called out among his people; he said, "o my people,
does not the kingdom of egypt belong to me, and these rivers 
flowing beneath me; then do you not see?
52.
or am i [not] better than this one [i.e., moses] who is insignificant
and hardly makes himself clear?1341
53.
then why have there not been placed upon him bracelets of 
gold or come with him the angels in conjunction?"
54.
so he bluffed his people, and they obeyed him.  indeed, they 
were [themselves] a people defiantly disobedient [of allah].
55.
and when they angered us, we took retribution from them 
and drowned them all.
56.
and we made them a precedent and an example for the later 
peoples.
57.
and when the son of mary was presented as an example,1342
immediately your people laughed aloud.
58.
and they said, "are our gods better, or is he?"1343  they did 
not present it [i.e., the comparison] except for [mere] argument.  
but, [in fact], they are a people prone to dispute.
                                               
1341that was true previous to his appointment as a prophet, at which time 
allah corrected his speech impediment.
1342of a creation of allah which is being worshipped along with him.
1343implying that they must all be the same.

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
492
59.
he [i.e., jesus] was not but a servant upon whom we bestowed 
favor, and we made him an example for the children of israel.
60.
and if we willed, we could have made [instead] of you angels
succeeding [one another]1344 on the earth.
61.
and indeed, he [i.e., jesus] will be [a sign for] knowledge of 
the hour, so be not in doubt of it, and follow me.1345  this is a 
straight path.
62.
and never let satan avert you.  indeed, he is to you a clear 
enemy.
63.
and when jesus brought clear proofs, he said, "i have come to 
you with wisdom [i.e., prophethood] and to make clear to you 
some of that over which you differ, so fear allah and obey me.
64.
indeed, allah is my lord and your lord, so worship him.  
this is a straight path."
65.
but the denominations from among them differed [and separated],
so woe to those who have wronged from the punishment of a 
painful day.
66.
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them 
suddenly while they perceive not?
67.
close friends, that day, will be enemies to each other, except 
for the righteous
68.
[to whom allah will say], "o my servants, no fear will there 
be concerning you this day, nor will you grieve,
69.
[you] who believed in our verses and were muslims.
70.
enter paradise, you and your kinds,1346 delighted."
71.
circulated among them will be plates and vessels of gold.  
and therein is whatever the souls desire and [what] delights 
the eyes, and you will abide therein eternally.
                                               
1344or "succeeding [you]."
1345i.e., follow the guidance and instruction of allah.
1346i.e., those like you.  another meaning may be "your spouses," i.e., the 
righteous among them.

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
493
72.
and that is paradise which you are made to inherit for what 
you used to do.
73.
for you therein is much fruit1347 from which you will eat.
74.
indeed, the criminals will be in the punishment of hell, abiding
eternally.
75.
it will not be allowed to subside for them, and they, therein, 
are in despair.
76.
and we did not wrong them, but it was they who were the 
wrongdoers.
77.
and they will call, "o malik,1348 let your lord put an end to 
us!"  he will say, "indeed, you will remain."
78.
we had certainly brought you the truth, but most of you, to 
the truth, were averse.
79.
or have they devised [some] affair?1349  but indeed, we are 
devising [a plan].
80.
or do they think that we hear not their secrets and their 
private conversations?  yes, [we do], and our messengers 
[i.e., angels] are with them recording.
81.
say, [o muhammad], "if the most merciful had a son, then i 
would be the first of [his] worshippers."1350
82.
exalted is the lord of the heavens and the earth, lord of the 
throne, above what they describe.
83.
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until 
they meet their day which they are promised.
84.
and it is he [i.e., allah] who is [the only] deity in the heaven, 
and on the earth [the only] deity.  and he is the wise, the 
knowing.
                                               
1347meaning everything delicious.
1348addressing the keeper of hell.
1349conspiracy against the prophet ().  the reference here is to the 
disbelievers of makkah.
1350only supposing it were so, which it is not.

surah 43 – az-zukhruf
juz 25
494
85.
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the 
heavens and the earth and whatever is between them and with 
whom is knowledge of the hour and to whom you will be 
returned.
86.
and those they invoke besides him do not possess [power of] 
intercession; but only those who testify to the truth [can benefit],
and they know.1351
87.
and if you asked them1352 who created them, they would 
surely say, "allah."  so how are they deluded?
88.
and [allah acknowledges] his saying,1353 "o my lord, indeed 
these are a people who do not believe."
89.
so turn aside from them and say, "peace."1354  but they are 
going to know.
                                               
1351that intercession is granted exclusively by permission of allah to those 
he wills.
1352those who associate others with allah.
1353i.e., the complaint of prophet muhammad () about his people.
1354meaning safety or security, i.e., "i will not harm you."  this was before 
permission was granted for armed struggle.

surah 44 – ad-dukhan
juz 25
495
surah ad-dukhan
1355
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
ha, meem.1356
2.
by the clear book,
3.
indeed, we sent it down during a blessed night.1357  indeed, 
we were to warn [mankind].
4.
therein [i.e., on that night] is made distinct1358 every precise 
matter –
5.
[every] matter [proceeding] from us.  indeed, we were to 
send [a messenger]
6.
as mercy from your lord.  indeed, he is the hearing, the 
knowing,
7.
lord of the heavens and the earth and that between them, if 
you would be certain.
8.
there is no deity except him; he gives life and causes death.  
[he is] your lord and the lord of your first forefathers.
9.
but they are in doubt, amusing themselves.
10.
then watch for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke
11.
covering the people; this is a painful torment.
12.
[they will say], "our lord, remove from us the torment; indeed,
we are believers."
13.
how will there be for them a reminder [at that time]?  and 
there had come to them a clear messenger.
14.
then they turned away from him and said, "[he was] taught 
[and is] a madman."
                                               
1355ad-dukhan:  smoke.
1356see footnote to 2:1.
1357the night of decree (qadr).  see surah 97.
1358or "is separated" or "apportioned," from what is inscribed in the 
preserved slate.  the angels record and descend with whatever allah 
has decreed for the coming year.

surah 44 – ad-dukhan
juz 25
496
15.
indeed, we will remove the torment for a little.  indeed, you 
[disbelievers] will return [to disbelief].
16.
the day we will strike with the greatest assault, indeed, we 
will take retribution.
17.
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh, 
and there came to them a noble messenger [i.e., moses],
18.
[saying], "render to me the servants of allah.1359  indeed, i 
am to you a trustworthy messenger,"
19.
and [saying], "be not haughty with allah.  indeed, i have 
come to you with clear authority.
20.
and indeed, i have sought refuge in my lord and your lord, 
lest you stone me.1360
21.
but if you do not believe me, then leave me alone."
22.
and [finally] he called to his lord that these were a criminal 
people.
23.
[allah said], "then set out with my servants by night.  indeed, 
you are to be pursued.
24.
and leave the sea in stillness.1361  indeed, they are an army to 
be drowned."
25.
how much they left behind of gardens and springs
26.
and crops and noble sites
27.
and comfort wherein they were amused.
28.
thus.  and we caused to inherit it another people.
29.
and the heaven and earth wept not for them, nor were they 
reprieved.
30.
and we certainly saved the children of israel from the 
humiliating torment –
                                               
1359i.e., the children of israel.
1360to death.  or "lest you assault me [with your tongues or harm me 
otherwise]."
1361after it has parted, in order that the soldiers of pharaoh would follow 
the children of israel and be drowned.

surah 44 – ad-dukhan
juz 25
497
31.
from pharaoh.  indeed, he was a haughty one among the 
transgressors.
32.
and we certainly chose them by knowledge over [all] the worlds.
33.
and we gave them of signs that in which there was a clear trial.
34.
indeed, these [disbelievers] are saying,
35.
"there is not but our first death, and we will not be resurrected.
36.
then bring [back] our forefathers, if you should be truthful."
37.
are they better or the people of tubba1362 and those before 
them?  we destroyed them, [for] indeed, they were criminals.
38.
and we did not create the heavens and earth and that between 
them in play.
39.
we did not create them except in truth, but most of them do 
not know.
40.
indeed, the day of judgement is the appointed time for them all –
41.
the day when no relation1363 will avail a relation at all, nor 
will they be helped –
42.
except those [believers] on whom allah has mercy.  indeed, 
he is the exalted in might, the merciful.
43.
indeed, the tree of zaqqum
44.
is food for the sinful.
45.
like murky oil, it boils within bellies
46.
like the boiling of scalding water.
47.
[it will be commanded], "seize him and drag him into the 
midst of the hellfire,
48.
then pour over his head from the torment of scalding water."
49.
[it will be said], "taste!  indeed, you are the honored, the 
noble!1364
                                               
1362the tribe of saba.
1363i.e., patron, protector or close associate.
1364as he had claimed upon the earth.  he is taunted with these words in 
hell as a reminder and additional torment.

surah 44 – ad-dukhan
juz 25
498
50.
indeed, this is what you used to dispute."
51.
indeed, the righteous will be in a secure place:
52.
within gardens and springs,
53.
wearing [garments of] fine silk and brocade, facing each other.
54.
thus.  and we will marry them to fair women with large, 
[beautiful] eyes.
55.
they will call therein for every [kind of] fruit – safe and secure.
56.
they will not taste death therein except the first death, and he 
will have protected them from the punishment of hellfire
57.
as bounty from your lord.  that is what is the great attainment.
58.
and indeed, we have eased it [i.e., the quran] in your tongue 
that they might be reminded.
59.
so watch, [o muhammad]; indeed, they are watching [for 
your end].

surah 45 – al-jathiyah
juz 25
499
surah al-jathiyah
1365
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
ha, meem.1366
2.
the revelation of the book is from allah, the exalted in might,
the wise.
3.
indeed, within the heavens and earth are signs for the believers.
4.
and in the creation of yourselves and what he disperses of
moving creatures are signs for people who are certain [in faith].
5.
and [in] the alternation of night and day and [in] what allah 
sends down from the sky of provision [i.e., rain] and gives life 
thereby to the earth after its lifelessness and [in his] directing 
of the winds are signs for a people who reason.
6.
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth.  
then in what statement after allah and his verses will they 
believe?
7.
woe to every sinful liar
8.
who hears the verses of allah recited to him, then persists 
arrogantly as if he had not heard them.  so give him tidings of 
a painful punishment.
9.
and when he knows anything of our verses, he takes them in 
ridicule.  those will have a humiliating punishment.
10.
before them1367 is hell, and what they had earned will not avail 
them at all nor what they had taken besides allah as allies.  
and they will have a great punishment.
11.
this [quran] is guidance.  and those who have disbelieved in 
the verses of their lord will have a painful punishment of foul 
nature.
                                               
1365al-jathiyah:  kneeling (in dread of the judgement).
1366see footnote to 2:1.
1367see footnote to 14:16.

surah 45 – al-jathiyah
juz 25
500
12.
it is allah who subjected to you the sea so that ships may sail 
upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty;
and perhaps you will be grateful.
13.
and he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and 
whatever is on the earth – all from him.  indeed in that are 
signs for a people who give thought.
14.
say, [o muhammad], to those who have believed that they 
[should] forgive those who expect not the days of allah [i.e., 
of his retribution] so that he may recompense a people1368 for 
what they used to earn.
15.
whoever does a good deed – it is for himself; and whoever 
does evil – it is against it [i.e., the self or soul].  then to your 
lord you will be returned.
16.
and we did certainly give the children of israel the scripture 
and judgement1369 and prophethood, and we provided them 
with good things and preferred them over the worlds.
17.
and we gave them clear proofs of the matter [of religion].  
and they did not differ except after knowledge had come to 
them – out of jealous animosity between themselves.  indeed, 
your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection
concerning that over which they used to differ.
18.
then we put you, [o muhammad], on an ordained way 
concerning the matter [of religion]; so follow it and do not 
follow the inclinations of those who do not know.
19.
indeed, they will never avail you against allah at all.  and indeed,
the wrongdoers are allies of one another; but allah is the protector
of the righteous.
20.
this [quran] is enlightenment for mankind and guidance and 
mercy for a people who are certain [in faith].
                                               
1368in the hereafter, where those who forgive will be rewarded and those 
who earned evil will be punished.  this was at the outset of dawah
(invitation to allah) before permission for jihad.
1369understanding of the law.

surah 45 – al-jathiyah
juz 25
501
21.
or do those who commit evils think we will make them like 
those who have believed and done righteous deeds – [make them]
equal in their life and their death?1370  evil is that which they 
judge [i.e., assume].
22.
and allah created the heavens and earth in truth and so that 
every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned, and 
they will not be wronged.
23.
have you seen he who has taken as his god his [own] desire, 
and allah has sent him astray due to knowledge1371 and has set 
a seal upon his hearing and his heart and put over his vision a 
veil?  so who will guide him after allah?  then will you not 
be reminded?
24.
and they say, "there is not but our worldly life; we die and 
live,1372 and nothing destroys us except time."  and they have 
of that no knowledge; they are only assuming.
25.
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
their argument is only that they say, "bring [back] our forefathers,
if you should be truthful."
26.
say, "allah causes you to live, then causes you to die; then he 
will assemble you for the day of resurrection, about which 
there is no doubt, but most of the people do not know."
27.
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth.  
and the day the hour appears – that day the falsifiers will lose.
28.
and you will see every nation kneeling [from fear].  every 
nation will be called to its record [and told], "today you will 
be recompensed for what you used to do.
29.
this, our record, speaks about you in truth.  indeed, we were 
                                               
1370another meaning is "...[the evildoers being] equal in their life and their 
death," i.e., unresponsive to guidance.
1371this can refer to allah's knowledge of that person and of his preference 
for his own inclinations or to that person's knowledge of the truth while 
he refuses it.
1372i.e., some people die and others live, replacing them.

surah 45 – al-jathiyah
juz 25
502
having transcribed1373 whatever you used to do."
30.
so as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their 
lord will admit them into his mercy.  that is what is the clear 
attainment.
31.
but as for those who disbelieved, [it will be said], "were not 
our verses recited to you, but you were arrogant and became a 
people of criminals?
32.
and when it was said, 'indeed, the promise of allah is truth 
and the hour [is coming] – no doubt about it,' you said, 'we 
know not what is the hour.  we assume only assumption, and 
we are not convinced.'"
33.
and the evil consequences of what they did will appear to them,
and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
34.
and it will be said, "today we will forget you as you forgot 
the meeting of this day of yours, and your refuge is the fire, 
and for you there are no helpers.
35.
that is because you took the verses of allah in ridicule, and
worldly life deluded you."  so that day they will not be removed
from it, nor will they be asked to appease [allah].
36.
then, to allah belongs [all] praise – lord of the heavens and 
lord of the earth, lord of the worlds.
37.
and to him belongs [all] grandeur within the heavens and the 
earth, and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
                                               
1373by recording angels.

surah 46 – al-ahqaf
juz 26
503
surah al-ahqaf
1374
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. ha, meem.1375
2. the revelation of the book is from allah, the exalted in might, 
the wise.
3. we did not create the heavens and earth and what is between 
them except in truth and [for] a specified term.  but those who
disbelieve, from that of which they are warned, are turning away.
4. say, [o muhammad], "have you considered that which you 
invoke besides allah?  show me what they have created of the 
earth; or did they have partnership in [creation of] the heavens?  
bring me a scripture [revealed] before this or a [remaining] 
trace of knowledge, if you should be truthful."
5. and who is more astray than he who invokes besides allah 
those who will not respond to him until the day of resurrection 
[i.e., never], and they, of their invocation, are unaware.
6. and when the people are gathered [that day], they [who were 
invoked] will be enemies to them, and they will be deniers of 
their worship.
7. and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, 
those who disbelieve say of the truth when it has come to them, 
"this is obvious magic."
8. or do they say, "he has invented it"?  say, "if i have invented it,
you will not possess for me [the power of protection] from allah
at all.  he is most knowing of that in which you are involved.1376  
sufficient is he as witness between me and you, and he is the 
forgiving, the merciful."
                                               
1374al-ahqaf:  the curving sand tracts, a characteristic of the region once 
inhabited by the tribe of aad.
1375see footnote to 2:1.
1376of false implications and suggestions.

surah 46 – al-ahqaf
juz 26
504
9.
say, "i am not something original among the messengers,1377
nor do i know what will be done with me or with you.  i only 
follow that which is revealed to me, and i am not but a clear 
warner."
10.
say, "have you considered:  if it [i.e., the quran] was from allah, 
and you disbelieved in it while a witness from the children of 
israel has testified to something similar1378 and believed while 
you were arrogant...?"1379  indeed, allah does not guide the 
wrongdoing people.
11.
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe, "if it had 
[truly] been good, they would not have preceded us to it."  and
when they are not guided by it, they will say, "this is an ancient
falsehood."
12.
and before it was the scripture of moses to lead and as a mercy.  
and this is a confirming book in an arabic tongue to warn those 
who have wronged and as good tidings to the doers of good.
13.
indeed, those who have said, "our lord is allah," and then 
remained on a right course – there will be no fear concerning 
them, nor will they grieve.
14.
those are the companions of paradise, abiding eternally therein
as reward for what they used to do.
15.
and we have enjoined upon man, to his parents, good treatment.  
his mother carried him with hardship and gave birth to him 
with hardship, and his gestation and weaning [period] is thirty 
months.  [he grows] until, when he reaches maturity and reaches
[the age of] forty years, he says, "my lord, enable me1380 to 
be grateful for your favor which you have bestowed upon me 
and upon my parents and to work righteousness of which you 
                                               
1377i.e., i am neither the first messenger to be sent, nor do i bring something 
different from the other messengers.
1378based upon information from the torah.
1379the conclusion is estimated to be "...would you not then be the most 
unjust of people?" or "...in what condition would you then be?"
1380literally, "gather within me the utmost strength and ability."

surah 46 – al-ahqaf
juz 26
505
will approve and make righteous for me my offspring.  indeed, i 
have repented to you, and indeed, i am of the muslims."
16.
those are the ones from whom we will accept the best of what
they did and overlook their misdeeds, [their being] among the 
companions of paradise.  [that is] the promise of truth which 
they had been promised.
17.
but one who says to his parents, "uff1381 to you; do you promise 
me that i will be brought forth [from the earth] when generations
before me have already passed on [into oblivion]?" while they
call to allah for help [and to their son], "woe to you!  believe!  
indeed, the promise of allah is truth."  but he says, "this is 
not but legends of the former peoples" –
18.
those are the ones upon whom the word [i.e., decree] has come
into effect, [who will be] among nations which had passed on 
before them of jinn and men.  indeed, they [all] were losers.
19.
and for all there are degrees [of reward and punishment] for 
what they have done, and [it is] so that he may fully
compensate them for their deeds, and they will not be wronged.
20.
and the day those who disbelieved are exposed to the fire [it 
will be said], "you exhausted your pleasures during your 
worldly life and enjoyed them, so this day you will be awarded
the punishment of [extreme] humiliation because you were 
arrogant upon the earth without right and because you were 
defiantly disobedient."
21.
and mention, [o muhammad], the brother of aad,1382 when 
he warned his people in [the region of] al-ahqaf – and warners 
had already passed on before him and after him – [saying], 
"do not worship except allah.  indeed, i fear for you the 
punishment of a terrible day."1383
                                               
1381an expression of distaste and irritation.
1382i.e., the prophet hud.
1383upon the earth.  it could also refer to "a tremendous day," i.e., that of 
resurrection.

surah 46 – al-ahqaf
juz 26
506
22.
they said, "have you come to delude us away from our gods?  
then bring us what you promise us, if you should be of the 
truthful."
23.
he said, "knowledge [of its time] is only with allah, and i 
convey to you that with which i was sent; but i see you [to be] 
a people behaving ignorantly."
24.
and when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys, 
they said, "this is a cloud bringing us rain!"  rather, it is that 
for which you were impatient:1384  a wind, within it a painful
punishment,
25.
destroying everything by command of its lord.  and they became
so that nothing was seen [of them] except their dwellings.  
thus do we recompense the criminal people.
26.
and we had certainly established them in such as we have 
not established you, and we made for them hearing and vision 
and hearts [i.e., intellect].  but their hearing and vision and 
hearts availed them not from anything [of the punishment] 
when they were [continually] rejecting the signs of allah; and 
they were enveloped by what they used to ridicule.
27.
and we have already destroyed what surrounds you of [those]
cities, and we have diversified the signs [or verses] that perhaps
they might return [from disbelief].
28.
then why did those they took besides allah as deities by which
to approach [him]1385 not aid them?  but they had strayed 
[i.e., departed] from them.  and that was their falsehood and 
what they were inventing.
29.
and [mention, o muhammad], when we directed to you a few
of the jinn, listening to the quran.  and when they attended it, 
they said, "listen quietly."  and when it was concluded, they 
went back to their people as warners.
                                               
1384when you challenged your prophet.  see verse 22 of this surah.
1385according to their claim.

surah 46 – al-ahqaf
juz 26
507
30.
they said, "o our people, indeed we have heard a [recited] 
book revealed after moses confirming what was before it 
which guides to the truth and to a straight path.
31.
o our people, respond to the caller [i.e., messenger] of allah1386
and believe in him; he [i.e., allah] will forgive for you your 
sins and protect you from a painful punishment.
32.
but he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not
cause failure [to him] upon earth, and he will not have besides 
him any protectors.  those are in manifest error."
33.
do they not see that allah, who created the heavens and earth 
and did not fail in their creation, is able to give life to the dead?  
yes.  indeed, he is over all things competent.
34.
and the day those who disbelieved are exposed to the fire [it 
will be said], "is this not the truth?"  they will say, "yes, by 
our lord."  he will say, "then taste the punishment for what 
you used to deny."1387
35.
so be patient, [o muhammad], as were those of determination 
among the messengers and do not be impatient for them.1388  it 
will be – on the day they see that which they are promised –
as though they had not remained [in the world] except an hour 
of a day.  [this is] notification.  and will [any] be destroyed 
except the defiantly disobedient people?
                                               
1386prophet muhammad ().
1387or "because you used to disbelieve."
1388i.e., for allah's punishment of the disbelievers.


juz 26
508

1389
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. those who disbelieve and avert [people] from the way of allah –
he will waste their deeds.1390
2. and those who believe and do righteous deeds and believe in 
what has been sent down upon muhammad – and it is the truth 
from their lord – he will remove from them their misdeeds and 
amend their condition.
3. that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and 
those who believe follow the truth from their lord.  thus does 
allah present to the people their comparisons.1391
4. so when you meet those who disbelieve [in battle], strike [their] 
necks until, when you have inflicted slaughter upon them, then
secure their bonds,1392 and either [confer] favor1393 afterwards or 
ransom [them] until the war lays down its burdens.1394  that [is 
the command].  and if allah had willed, he could have taken 
vengeance upon them [himself], but [he ordered armed struggle]
to test some of you by means of others.  and those who are 
killed in the cause of allah – never will he waste their deeds.
5. he will guide them and amend their condition
6. and admit them to paradise, which he has made known to them.
7. o you who have believed, if you support allah, he will support 
you and plant firmly your feet.
8. but those who disbelieve – for them is misery, and he will waste
their deeds.
                                               
1389muhammad:  (the prophet) muhammad ().
1390i.e., cause them to be lost or make them worthless, earning no reward.
1391so that they may know the results of their choice.
1392i.e., take those remaining as captives.
1393i.e., release them without ransom.
1394i.e., its armor, machinery, etc., meaning "until the war is over."


juz 26
509
9.
that is because they disliked what allah revealed, so he 
rendered worthless their deeds.
10.
have they not traveled through the land and seen how was the 
end of those before them?  allah destroyed [everything] over 
them,1395 and for the disbelievers is something comparable.
11.
that is because allah is the protector of those who have 
believed and because the disbelievers have no protector.
12.
indeed, allah will admit those who have believed and done
righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow, but those
who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as grazing livestock 
eat, and the fire will be a residence for them.
13.
and how many a city was stronger than your city [i.e., makkah]
which drove you out?  we destroyed them; and there was no 
helper for them.
14.
so is he who is on clear evidence from his lord like him to 
whom the evil of his work has been made attractive and they 
follow their [own] desires?
15.
is the description of paradise, which the righteous are promised,
wherein are rivers of water unaltered,1396 rivers of milk the 
taste of which never changes, rivers of wine delicious to those 
who drink, and rivers of purified honey, in which they will 
have from all [kinds of] fruits and forgiveness from their 
lord...  [are its inhabitants] like those who abide eternally in 
the fire and are given to drink scalding water that will sever 
their intestines?
16.
and among them, [o muhammad], are those who listen to you,
until when they depart from you, they say to those who were 
given knowledge,1397 "what has he said just now?"  those are 
the ones of whom allah has sealed over their hearts and who 
have followed their [own] desires.
                                               
1395i.e., destroyed them and all they owned.
1396in taste or smell, neither stagnant nor polluted.
1397from among the prophet's companions.


juz 26
510
17.
and those who are guided – he increases them in guidance 
and gives them their righteousness.1398
18.
then do they await except that the hour should come upon 
them unexpectedly?  but already there have come [some of] 
its indications.  then how [i.e., what good] to them, when it 
has come, will be their remembrance?
19.
so know, [o muhammad], that there is no deity except allah 
and ask forgiveness for your sin1399 and for the believing men 
and believing women.  and allah knows of your movement 
and your resting place.
20.
those who believe say, "why has a surah1400 not been sent 
down?"  but when a precise surah is revealed and fighting is 
mentioned therein, you see those in whose hearts is disease 
[i.e., hypocrisy] looking at you with a look of one overcome by
death.  and more appropriate for them1401 [would have been]
21.
obedience and good words.  and when the matter [of fighting]
was determined, if they had been true to allah, it would have 
been better for them.
22.
so would you perhaps, if you turned away,1402 cause corruption
on earth and sever your [ties of] relationship?
23.
those [who do so] are the ones that allah has cursed, so he 
deafened them and blinded their vision.
24.
then do they not reflect upon the quran, or are there locks 
upon [their] hearts?
25.
indeed, those who reverted back [to disbelief] after guidance 
had become clear to them – satan enticed them and prolonged 
hope for them.
                                               
1398taqwa, meaning piety, consciousness and fear of allah, and care to avoid
his displeasure.
1399see footnote to 40:55.
1400i.e., one in which permission is given the believers to fight their enemies.
1401the words "awla lahum" can also be interpreted as "woe to them!"  in 
that case, the following verse would begin, "[better for them would 
have been] obedience and good words."
1402from islam or from jihad (struggling in the cause of allah).


juz 26
511
26.
that is because they said to those who disliked what allah 
sent down,1403 "we will obey you in part of the matter."  and 
allah knows what they conceal.
27.
then how [will it be] when the angels take them in death, 
striking their faces and their backs?
28.
that is because they followed what angered allah and disliked
[what earns] his pleasure, so he rendered worthless their deeds.
29.
or do those in whose hearts is disease think that allah would 
never expose their [feelings of] hatred?
30.
and if we willed, we could show them to you, and you would 
know them by their mark; but you will surely know them by 
the tone of [their] speech.  and allah knows your deeds.
31.
and we will surely test you until we make evident those who 
strive among you [for the cause of allah] and the patient, and 
we will test your affairs.
32.
indeed, those who disbelieved and averted [people] from the 
path of allah and opposed the messenger after guidance had 
become clear to them – never will they harm allah at all, and 
he will render worthless their deeds.
33.
o you who have believed, obey allah and obey the messenger 
and do not invalidate your deeds.
34.
indeed, those who disbelieved and averted [people] from the 
path of allah and then died while they were disbelievers –
never will allah forgive them.
35.
so do not weaken and call for peace while you are superior; 
and allah is with you and will never deprive you of [the 
reward of] your deeds.
36.
[this] worldly life is only amusement and diversion.  and if 
you believe and fear allah, he will give you your rewards and 
not ask you for your properties.
                                               
1403i.e., the jews of madinah.


juz 26
512
37.
if he should ask you for them and press you, you would withhold, 
and he would expose your hatred [i.e., unwillingness].
38.
here you are – those invited to spend in the cause of allah –
but among you are those who withhold [out of greed].  and 
whoever withholds only withholds [benefit] from himself; and 
allah is the free of need, while you are the needy.  and if you 
turn away [i.e., refuse], he will replace you with another people;
then they will not be the likes of you.

surah 48 – al-fath
juz 26
513
surah al-fath
1404
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. indeed, we have given you, [o muhammad], a clear conquest1405
2. that allah may forgive for you what preceded of your sin [i.e., 
errors] and what will follow and complete his favor upon you 
and guide you to a straight path
3. and [that] allah may aid you with a mighty victory.
4. it is he who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers
that they would increase in faith along with their [present] faith.  
and to allah belong the soldiers of the heavens and the earth, 
and ever is allah knowing and wise.
5. [and] that he may admit the believing men and the believing 
women to gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide therein 
eternally and remove from them their misdeeds – and ever is that,
in the sight of allah, a great attainment –
6. and [that] he may punish the hypocrite men and hypocrite 
women, and the polytheist men and polytheist women – those 
who assume about allah an assumption of evil nature.  upon 
them is a misfortune of evil nature; and allah has become angry 
with them and has cursed them and prepared for them hell, and 
evil it is as a destination.
7. and to allah belong the soldiers of the heavens and the earth.  
and ever is allah exalted in might and wise.
8. indeed, we have sent you as a witness and a bringer of good 
tidings and a warner
                                               
1404al-fath:  the conquest.
1405ibn masud said, "you [people] consider the conquest to be that of makkah, 
but we consider it to be the treaty of al-hudaybiyyah."  al-bukhari
reported a similar quotation from al-bara bin azib.  although initially 
regarded by the companions as a setback, the treaty, in effect, served to 
promote the spread of islam, which led to the conquest of makkah two 
years later.

surah 48 – al-fath
juz 26
514
9.
that you [people] may believe in allah and his messenger 
and honor him and respect him [i.e., the prophet ()] and 
exalt him [i.e., allah] morning and afternoon.
10.
indeed, those who pledge allegiance to you, [o muhammad] –
they are actually pledging allegiance to allah.  the hand1406 of 
allah is over their hands.1407  so he who breaks his word only 
breaks it to the detriment of himself.  and he who fulfills that 
which he has promised allah – he will give him a great reward.
11.
those who remained behind of the bedouins will say to you, 
"our properties and our families occupied us, so ask forgiveness
for us."  they say with their tongues what is not within their
hearts.  say, "then who could prevent allah at all if he intended
for you harm or intended for you benefit?  rather, ever is allah,
with what you do, acquainted.
12.
but you thought that the messenger and the believers would
never return to their families, ever, and that was made pleasing 
in your hearts.  and you assumed an assumption of evil and 
became a people ruined."
13.
and whoever has not believed in allah and his messenger –
then indeed, we have prepared for the disbelievers a blaze.
14.
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth.  
he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills.  and
ever is allah forgiving and merciful.
15.
those who remained behind will say when you set out toward 
the war booty to take it, "let us follow you."  they wish to 
change the words of allah.  say, "never will you follow us.  
thus did allah say before."  so they will say, "rather, you envy
us."  but [in fact] they were not understanding except a little.1408
16.
say to those who remained behind of the bedouins, "you will 
be called to [face] a people of great military might; you may 
                                               
1406see footnote to 2:19.
1407meaning that he (subhanahu wa taala) accepted their pledge.
1408i.e., they only understood the material aspects of life.

surah 48 – al-fath
juz 26
515
fight them, or they will submit.1409  so if you obey, allah will 
give you a good reward; but if you turn away as you turned 
away before, he will punish you with a painful punishment."
17.
there is not upon the blind any guilt or upon the lame any guilt
or upon the ill any guilt [for remaining behind].  and whoever 
obeys allah and his messenger – he will admit him to gardens
beneath which rivers flow; but whoever turns away – he will 
punish him with a painful punishment.
18.
certainly was allah pleased with the believers when they
pledged allegiance to you, [o muhammad], under the tree, and 
he knew what was in their hearts, so he sent down tranquility 
upon them and rewarded them with an imminent conquest1410
19.
and much war booty which they will take.  and ever is allah 
exalted in might and wise.
20.
allah has promised you much booty that you will take [in the 
future] and has hastened for you this [victory] and withheld 
the hands of people from you – that it may be a sign for the 
believers and [that] he may guide you to a straight path.
21.
and [he promises] other [victories] that you were [so far] 
unable to [realize] which allah has already encompassed.1411  
and ever is allah, over all things, competent.
22.
and if those [makkans] who disbelieve had fought you, they 
would have turned their backs [in flight].  then they would 
not find a protector or a helper.
23.
[this is] the established way of allah which has occurred before.  
and never will you find in the way of allah any change.
24.
and it is he who withheld their hands from you and your hands 
from them within [the area of] makkah after he caused you to 
overcome them.  and ever is allah, of what you do, seeing.
                                               
1409to allah in islam.
1410that of khaybar, which preceded the conquest of makkah.
1411i.e., prepared for you or decreed.

surah 48 – al-fath
juz 26
516
25.
they are the ones who disbelieved and obstructed you from 
al-masjid al-haram while the offering1412 was prevented from 
reaching its place of sacrifice.  and if not for believing men 
and believing women whom you did not know – that you might
trample [i.e., kill] them and there would befall you because of 
them dishonor without [your] knowledge – [you would have 
been permitted to enter makkah].  [this was so] that allah 
might admit to his mercy whom he willed.  if they had been 
apart [from them], we would have punished those who 
disbelieved among them with painful punishment
26.
when those who disbelieved had put into their hearts 
chauvinism – the chauvinism of the time of ignorance.  but 
allah sent down his tranquility upon his messenger and upon 
the believers and imposed upon them the word of righteousness, 
and they were more deserving of it and worthy of it.  and ever 
is allah, of all things, knowing.
27.
certainly has allah showed to his messenger the vision [i.e., 
dream] in truth.  you will surely enter al-masjid al-haram, if 
allah wills, in safety, with your heads shaved and [hair] 
shortened,1413 not fearing [anyone].  he knew what you did not 
know and has arranged before that a conquest near [at hand].
28.
it is he who sent his messenger with guidance and the religion
of truth to manifest it over all religion.  and sufficient is allah 
as witness.
29.
muhammad is the messenger of allah; and those with him are 
forceful against the disbelievers, merciful among themselves.  
you see them bowing and prostrating [in prayer], seeking 
bounty from allah and [his] pleasure.  their mark [i.e., sign] 
is on their faces [i.e., foreheads] from the trace of prostration.  
that is their description in the torah.  and their description in 
the gospel is as a plant which produces its offshoots and
strengthens them so they grow firm and stand upon their stalks,
                                               
1412i.e., seventy camels intended for sacrifice and feeding of the poor.
1413i.e., having completed the rites of umrah.

surah 48 – al-fath
juz 26
517
delighting the sowers – so that he [i.e., allah] may enrage by 
them1414 the disbelievers.  allah has promised those who believe
and do righteous deeds among them forgiveness and a great 
reward.
                                               
1414the given examples depict the prophet () and his companions.

surah 49 – al-hujurat
juz 26
518
surah al-hujurat
1415
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o you who have believed, do not put [yourselves] before allah 
and his messenger1416 but fear allah.  indeed, allah is hearing 
and knowing.
2. o you who have believed, do not raise your voices above the
voice of the prophet or be loud to him in speech like the loudness 
of some of you to others, lest your deeds become worthless while 
you perceive not.
3. indeed, those who lower their voices before the messenger of 
allah – they are the ones whose hearts allah has tested for 
righteousness.  for them is forgiveness and great reward.
4. indeed, those who call you, [o muhammad], from behind the 
chambers – most of them do not use reason.
5. and if they had been patient until you [could] come out to them,
it would have been better for them.  but allah is forgiving and 
merciful.
6. o you who have believed, if there comes to you a disobedient 
one with information, investigate, lest you harm a people out of 
ignorance and become, over what you have done, regretful.
7. and know that among you is the messenger of allah.  if he were 
to obey you in much of the matter, you would be in difficulty, 
but allah has endeared to you the faith and has made it pleasing 
in your hearts and has made hateful to you disbelief, defiance 
and disobedience.  those are the [rightly] guided.
8. [it is] as bounty from allah and favor.  and allah is knowing 
and wise.
                                               
1415al-hujurat:  the chambers, referring to the rooms in which the wives 
of the prophet () lived.
1416rather, wait for instruction and follow the way of the prophet ().

surah 49 – al-hujurat
juz 26
519
9.
and if two factions among the believers should fight, then make
settlement between the two.  but if one of them oppresses the 
other, then fight against the one that oppresses until it returns to
the ordinance of allah.  and if it returns, then make settlement
between them in justice and act justly.  indeed, allah loves 
those who act justly.
10.
the believers are but brothers, so make settlement between 
your brothers.  and fear allah that you may receive mercy.
11.
o you who have believed, let not a people ridicule [another] 
people; perhaps they may be better than them; nor let women 
ridicule [other] women; perhaps they may be better than them.  
and do not insult one another and do not call each other by 
[offensive] nicknames.  wretched is the name [i.e., mention] of
disobedience after [one's] faith.  and whoever does not repent –
then it is those who are the wrongdoers.
12.
o you who have believed, avoid much [negative] assumption.  
indeed, some assumption is sin.  and do not spy or backbite 
each other.  would one of you like to eat the flesh of his brother
when dead?  you would detest it.  and fear allah; indeed, 
allah is accepting of repentance and merciful.
13.
o mankind, indeed we have created you from male and female 
and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one 
another.  indeed, the most noble of you in the sight of allah is 
the most righteous1417 of you.  indeed, allah is knowing and 
acquainted.
14.
the bedouins say, "we have believed."  say, "you have not 
[yet] believed; but say [instead], 'we have submitted,' for faith 
has not yet entered your hearts.  and if you obey allah and 
his messenger, he will not deprive you from your deeds1418
of anything.  indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful."
                                               
1417literally, "he who has the most taqwa," i.e., consciousness and fear of 
allah, piety and righteousness.
1418i.e., the reward thereof.

surah 49 – al-hujurat
juz 26
520
15.
the believers are only the ones who have believed in allah 
and his messenger and then doubt not but strive with their 
properties and their lives in the cause of allah.  it is those who 
are the truthful.
16.
say, "would you acquaint allah with your religion while allah
knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth,
and allah is knowing of all things?"
17.
they consider it a favor to you that they have accepted islam.  
say, "do not consider your islam a favor to me.  rather, allah 
has conferred favor upon you that he has guided you to the 
faith, if you should be truthful."
18.
indeed, allah knows the unseen [aspects] of the heavens and 
the earth.  and allah is seeing of what you do.

surah 50 – qaf
juz 26
521
surah qaf
1419
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
qaf.1420  by the honored quran...1421
2.
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from 
among themselves, and the disbelievers say, "this is an amazing
thing.
3.
when we have died and have become dust, [we will return to 
life]?  that is a distant [i.e., unlikely] return."
4.
we know what the earth diminishes [i.e., consumes] of them, 
and with us is a retaining record.
5.
but they denied the truth when it came to them, so they are in 
a confused condition.
6.
have they not looked at the heaven above them – how we 
structured it and adorned it and [how] it has no rifts?
7.
and the earth – we spread it out and cast therein firmly set 
mountains and made grow therein [something] of every 
beautiful kind,
8.
giving insight and a reminder for every servant who turns [to 
allah].
9.
and we have sent down blessed rain from the sky and made 
grow thereby gardens and grain from the harvest
10.
and lofty palm trees having fruit arranged in layers –
11.
as provision for the servants, and we have given life thereby 
to a dead land.  thus is the emergence [i.e., resurrection].
12.
the people of noah denied before them,1422 and the companions
of the well1423 and thamud
                                               
1419qaf:  (the letter) qaf.
1420see footnote to 2:1.
1421see footnote to 38:1.
1422i.e., before the disbelievers of makkah.
1423see footnote to 25:38.

surah 50 – qaf
juz 26
522
13.
and aad and pharaoh and the brothers [i.e., people] of lot
14.
and the companions of the thicket and the people of tubba.  
all denied the messengers, so my threat was justly fulfilled.
15.
did we fail in the first creation?  but they are in confusion 
over a new creation.
16.
and we have already created man and know what his soul 
whispers to him, and we are closer1424 to him than [his] jugular
vein
17.
when the two receivers [i.e., recording angels] receive,1425
seated on the right and on the left.
18.
he [i.e., man] does not utter any word except that with him is 
an observer prepared [to record].
19.
and the intoxication of death will bring the truth; that is what 
you were trying to avoid.
20.
and the horn will be blown.  that is the day of [carrying out] 
the threat.
21.
and every soul will come, with it a driver and a witness.1426
22.
[it will be said], "you were certainly in unmindfulness of this, 
and we have removed from you your cover,1427 so your sight, 
this day, is sharp."
23.
and his companion, [the angel], will say, "this [record] is 
what is with me, prepared."
24.
[allah will say], "throw into hell every obstinate disbeliever,
25.
preventer of good, aggressor, and doubter,
26.
who made [as equal] with allah another deity; then throw him
into the severe punishment."
                                               
1424in absolute knowledge of everything about him.  "we" has also been
interpreted to mean the angels who are mentioned in the following verse.
1425and record each word and deed.
1426i.e., one angel driving the soul to the judgement and one to testify as to 
its deeds.
1427of heedlessness, or that which had sealed your hearing, your vision and 
your heart from guidance.

surah 50 – qaf
juz 26
523
27.
his [devil] companion will say, "our lord, i did not make him
transgress, but he [himself] was in extreme error."
28.
[allah] will say, "do not dispute before me, while i had already
presented to you the threat [i.e., warning].
29.
the word [i.e., decree] will not be changed with me, and never
will i be unjust to the servants."
30.
on the day we will say to hell, "have you been filled?" and 
it will say, "are there some more,"
31.
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far,
32.
[it will be said], "this is what you were promised – for every 
returner [to allah] and keeper [of his covenant]
33.
who feared the most merciful unseen and came with a heart 
returning [in repentance].
34.
enter it in peace.  this is the day of eternity."
35.
they will have whatever they wish therein, and with us is more.
36.
and how many a generation before them did we destroy who 
were greater than them in [striking] power and had explored 
throughout the lands.  is there any place of escape?
37.
indeed in that is a reminder for whoever has a heart or who 
listens while he is present [in mind].
38.
and we did certainly create the heavens and earth and what is 
between them in six days, and there touched us no weariness.
39.
so be patient, [o muhammad], over what they say and exalt 
[allah] with praise of your lord before the rising of the sun 
and before its setting,
40.
and [in part] of the night exalt him and after prostration [i.e., 
prayer].
41.
and listen on the day when the caller1428 will call out from a 
place that is near –
                                               
1428an angel who will call out allah's command for the resurrection.

surah 50 – qaf
juz 26
524
42.
the day they will hear the blast [of the horn] in truth.  that is 
the day of emergence [from the graves].
43.
indeed, it is we who give life and cause death, and to us is 
the destination
44.
on the day the earth breaks away from them [and they emerge]
rapidly; that is a gathering easy for us.
45.
we are most knowing of what they say, and you are not over 
them a tyrant.1429  but remind by the quran whoever fears my 
threat.
                                               
1429forcing people to belief or submission.

surah 51 – adhdhariyat
juz 26
525
surah adhdhariyat
1430
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the [winds] scattering [dust], dispersing [it]
2.
and the [clouds] carrying a load [of water]
3.
and the ships sailing with ease
4.
and the [angels] apportioning [each] matter,
5.
indeed, what you are promised is true.
6.
and indeed, the recompense is to occur.
7.
by the heaven containing pathways,1431
8.
indeed, you are in differing speech.1432
9.
deluded away from it [i.e., the quran] is he who is deluded.
10.
destroyed are the falsifiers1433
11.
who are within a flood [of confusion] and heedless.
12.
they ask, "when is the day of recompense?"
13.
[it is] the day they will be tormented over the fire
14.
[and will be told], "taste your torment.  this is that for which 
you were impatient."
15.
indeed, the righteous will be among gardens and springs,
16.
accepting what their lord has given them.  indeed, they were 
before that doers of good.
17.
they used to sleep but little of the night,1434
18.
and in the hours before dawn they would ask forgiveness,
19.
and from their properties was [given] the right of the [needy] 
petitioner and the deprived.
                                               
1430adhdhariyat:  the scattering winds.
1431explained as tracks, layers or orbits.
1432about prophet muhammad () and the quran.
1433or "may they be destroyed" or "cursed."
1434i.e., spending a portion of the night in prayer and supplication.

surah 51 – adhdhariyat
juz 27
526
20.
and on the earth are signs for the certain [in faith]
21.
and in yourselves.  then will you not see?
22.
and in the heaven is your provision and whatever you are 
promised.
23.
then by the lord of the heaven and earth, indeed, it is truth –
just as [sure as] it is that you are speaking.
24.
has there reached you the story of the honored guests of 
ibrahim?1435 –
25.
when they entered upon him and said, "[we greet you with] 
peace."  he answered, "[and upon you] peace; [you are] a 
people unknown."
26.
then he went to his family and came with a fat [roasted] calf
27.
and placed it near them; he said, "will you not eat?"
28.
and he felt from them apprehension.1436  they said, "fear not,"
and gave him good tidings of a learned boy.
29.
and his wife approached with a cry [of alarm] and struck her 
face and said, "[i am] a barren old woman!"
30.
they said, "thus has said your lord; indeed, he is the wise, 
the knowing."
31.
[ibrahim] said, "then what is your business [here], o 
messengers?"
32.
they said, "indeed, we have been sent to a people of criminals1437
33.
to send down upon them stones of clay,
34.
marked in the presence of your lord for the transgressors."
35.
so we brought out whoever was in them [i.e., the cities] of 
the believers.
36.
and we found not within them other than a [single] house of 
muslims.1438
                                               
1435who were angels given honored positions by allah.
1436see footnote to 11:70.
1437i.e., those who defied lot (upon him be peace).
1438i.e., lot and his family, excepting his wife.

surah 51 – adhdhariyat
juz 27
527
37.
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful 
punishment.
38.
and in moses [was a sign], when we sent him to pharaoh 
with clear authority.
39.
but he turned away with his supporters and said, "a magician 
or a madman."
40.
so we took him and his soldiers and cast them into the sea, 
and he was blameworthy.
41.
and in aad [was a sign], when we sent against them the 
barren wind.1439
42.
it left nothing of what it came upon but that it made it like 
disintegrated ruins.
43.
and in thamud, when it was said to them, "enjoy yourselves 
for a time."
44.
but they were insolent toward the command of their lord, so 
the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on.
45.
and they were unable to arise, nor could they defend themselves.
46.
and [we destroyed] the people of noah before; indeed, they 
were a people defiantly disobedient.
47.
and the heaven we constructed with strength, and indeed, we 
are [its] expander.
48.
and the earth we have spread out, and excellent is the preparer.
49.
and of all things we created two mates [i.e., counterparts];
perhaps you will remember.
50.
so flee to allah.1440  indeed, i am to you from him a clear 
warner.
51.
and do not make [as equal] with allah another deity.  indeed, 
i am to you from him a clear warner.
                                               
1439barren of any benefit, i.e., evil.
1440i.e., turn to allah and take refuge in him from disbelief and sin, thereby 
escaping his punishment.

surah 51 – adhdhariyat
juz 27
528
52.
similarly, there came not to those before them any messenger 
except that they said, "a magician or a madman."
53.
did they suggest it to them?1441  rather, they [themselves] are 
a transgressing people.
54.
so leave them, [o muhammad], for you are not to be blamed.
55.
and remind, for indeed, the reminder benefits the believers.
56.
and i did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship me.
57.
i do not want from them any provision, nor do i want them to 
feed me.
58.
indeed, it is allah who is the [continual] provider, the firm 
possessor of strength.
59.
and indeed, for those who have wronged is a portion [of 
punishment] like the portion of their companions [i.e., 
predecessors], so let them not impatiently urge me.
60.
and woe to those who have disbelieved from their day which 
they are promised.
                                               
1441i.e., did the former disbelievers pass on these words to the makkans so 
that they repeat the same expressions?

surah 52 – at-tur
juz 27
529
surah at-tur
1442
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the mount
2.
and [by] a book inscribed1443
3.
in parchment spread open
4.
and [by] the frequented house1444
5.
and [by] the ceiling [i.e., heaven] raised high
6.
and [by] the sea filled [with fire],1445
7.
indeed, the punishment of your lord will occur.
8.
of it there is no preventer.
9.
on the day the heaven will sway with circular motion
10.
and the mountains will pass on, departing1446 –
11.
then woe, that day, to the deniers,
12.
who are in [empty] discourse amusing themselves.
13.
the day they are thrust toward the fire of hell with a [violent] 
thrust, [its angels will say],
14.
"this is the fire which you used to deny.
15.
then is this magic, or do you not see?
16.
[enter to] burn therein; then be patient or impatient – it is all 
the same for you.  you are only being recompensed [for] what 
you used to do."
17.
indeed, the righteous will be in gardens and pleasure,
                                               
1442at-tur:  the mount, where allah spoke to moses.
1443interpreted as the preserved slate or possibly the quran.
1444the house of worship for the angels in the seventh heaven, comparable 
to the kabah on earth.
1445on the day of resurrection.  or "the sea which has overflowed."
1446becoming dust and moving as clouds.

surah 52 – at-tur
juz 27
530
18.
enjoying what their lord has given them, and their lord protected 
them from the punishment of hellfire.
19.
[they will be told], "eat and drink in satisfaction for what you 
used to do."
20.
they will be reclining on thrones lined up, and we will marry 
them to fair women with large, [beautiful] eyes.
21.
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them
in faith – we will join with them their descendants, and we 
will not deprive them of anything of their deeds.1447  every 
person, for what he earned, is retained.1448
22.
and we will provide them with fruit and meat from whatever 
they desire.
23.
they will exchange with one another a cup [of wine] wherein 
[results] no ill speech or commission of sin.
24.
there will circulate among them [servant] boys [especially] 
for them, as if they were pearls well-protected.
25.
and they will approach one another, inquiring of each other.
26.
they will say, "indeed, we were previously among our people 
fearful [of displeasing allah].
27.
so allah conferred favor upon us and protected us from the 
punishment of the scorching fire.
28.
indeed, we used to supplicate him before.  indeed, it is he 
who is the beneficent, the merciful."
29.
so remind, [o muhammad], for you are not, by the favor of 
your lord, a soothsayer or a madman.
30.
or do they say [of you], "a poet for whom we await a misfortune
of time"?1449
31.
say, "wait, for indeed i am, with you, among the waiters."
                                               
1447i.e., the reward thereof.
1448i.e., subject or held responsible.  literally, "a hostage."
1449i.e., some accident or inevitable death.

surah 52 – at-tur
juz 27
531
32.
or do their minds1450 command them to [say] this, or are they 
a transgressing people?
33.
or do they say, "he has made it up"?  rather, they do not believe.
34.
then let them produce a statement like it, if they should be 
truthful.
35.
or were they created by nothing, or were they the creators [of 
themselves]?
36.
or did they create the heavens and the earth?  rather, they are 
not certain.
37.
or have they the depositories [containing the provision] of 
your lord?  or are they the controllers [of them]?
38.
or have they a stairway [into the heaven] upon which they listen?  
then let their listener produce a clear authority [i.e., proof].
39.
or has he daughters while you have sons?
40.
or do you, [o muhammad], ask of them a payment, so they 
are by debt burdened down?
41.
or have they [knowledge of] the unseen, so they write [it] down?
42.
or do they intend a plan?  but those who disbelieve – they are 
the object of a plan.
43.
or have they a deity other than allah?  exalted is allah above 
whatever they associate with him.
44.
and if they were to see a fragment from the sky falling,1451
they would say, "[it is merely] clouds heaped up."
45.
so leave them until they meet their day in which they will be 
struck insensible –
46.
the day their plan will not avail them at all, nor will they be 
helped.
47.
and indeed, for those who have wronged is a punishment1452
                                               
1450in this expression is also a subtle allusion to the leaders of the quraysh, 
who considered themselves to be great minds.
1451marking the onset of allah's punishment, as they had requested.
1452if not in this world, in the grave.

surah 52 – at-tur
juz 27
532
before that, but most of them do not know.
48.
and be patient, [o muhammad], for the decision of your lord,
for indeed, you are in our eyes [i.e., sight].  and exalt [allah] 
with praise of your lord when you arise
49.
and in a part of the night exalt him and after [the setting of] 
the stars.

surah 53 – an-najm
juz 27
533
surah an-najm
1453
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the star when it descends,
2.
your companion [i.e., muhammad] has not strayed, nor has he 
erred,
3.
nor does he speak from [his own] inclination.
4.
it is not but a revelation revealed,
5.
taught to him by one intense in strength [i.e., gabriel] –
6.
one of soundness.1454  and he rose to [his] true form1455
7.
while he was in the higher [part of the] horizon.1456
8.
then he approached and descended
9.
and was at a distance of two bow lengths or nearer.
10.
and he revealed to his servant1457 what he revealed [i.e., 
conveyed].
11.
the heart1458 did not lie [about] what it saw.
12.
so will you dispute with him over what he saw?
13.
and he certainly saw him in another descent1459
14.
at the lote tree of the utmost boundary –
15.
near it is the garden of refuge [i.e., paradise] –
16.
when there covered the lote tree that which covered [it].1460
                                               
1453an-najm:  the star.
1454i.e., strength of body and of mind.
1455gabriel appeared to muhammad () at the outset of his prophethood in 
the angelic form in which allah originally created him.
1456i.e., in the sky, above the eastern horizon.
1457i.e., to the servant of allah, prophet muhammad ().
1458i.e., mind or perception (of the prophet []).
1459i.e., on another occasion.  during his ascent into the heavens (al-miraj), 
the prophet () also saw gabriel in his true form.
1460then and there he () saw gabriel in angelic form.

surah 53 – an-najm
juz 27
534
17.
the sight [of the prophet ()] did not swerve, nor did it 
transgress [its limit].
18.
he certainly saw of the greatest signs of his lord.
19.
so have you considered al-lat and al-uzza?
20.
and manat, the third – the other one?1461
21.
is the male for you and for him the female?
22.
that, then, is an unjust division.1462
23.
they are not but [mere] names you have named them – you 
and your forefathers – for which allah has sent down no
authority.  they follow not except assumption and what [their] 
souls desire, and there has already come to them from their 
lord guidance.
24.
or is there for man whatever he wishes?
25.
rather, to allah belongs the hereafter and the first [life].
26.
and how many angels there are in the heavens whose intercession
will not avail at all except [only] after allah has permitted [it] 
to whom he wills and approves.
27.
indeed, those who do not believe in the hereafter name the 
angels female names,
28.
and they have thereof no knowledge.  they follow not except 
assumption, and indeed, assumption avails not against the
truth at all.
29.
so turn away from whoever turns his back on our message 
and desires not except the worldly life.
30.
that is their sum of knowledge.  indeed, your lord is most
knowing of who strays from his way, and he is most knowing 
of who is guided.
                                               
1461the three names given in this and the previous verse are those of well-known
"goddesses" which were worshipped by the pagan arabs before the spread
of islam.
1462according to their own standards.

surah 53 – an-najm
juz 27
535
31.
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever 
is in the earth – that he may recompense those who do evil 
with [the penalty of] what they have done and recompense 
those who do good with the best [reward] –
32.
those who avoid the major sins and immoralities, only 
[committing] slight ones.  indeed, your lord is vast in forgiveness.  
he was most knowing of you when he produced you from the 
earth and when you were fetuses in the wombs of your mothers.  
so do not claim yourselves to be pure; he is most knowing of 
who fears him.
33.
have you seen the one who turned away
34.
and gave a little and [then] refrained?
35.
does he have knowledge of the unseen, so he sees?1463
36.
or has he not been informed of what was in the scriptures of 
moses
37.
and [of] ibrahim, who fulfilled [his obligations] –
38.
that no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another
39.
and that there is not for man except that [good] for which he 
strives
40.
and that his effort is going to be seen –
41.
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense –
42.
and that to your lord is the finality
43.
and that it is he who makes [one] laugh and weep
44.
and that it is he who causes death and gives life
45.
and that he creates the two mates – the male and female –
46.
from a sperm-drop when it is emitted
47.
and that [incumbent] upon him is the other [i.e., next] creation
48.
and that it is he who enriches and suffices
                                               
1463knows that his provision will be exhausted if he spends on the poor, 
while allah (subhanahu wa taala) has promised otherwise.

surah 53 – an-najm
juz 27
536
49.
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius1464
50.
and that he destroyed the first [people of] aad
51.
and thamud – and he did not spare [them] –
52.
and the people of noah before.  indeed, it was they who were 
[even] more unjust and oppressing.
53.
and the overturned towns1465 he hurled down
54.
and covered them by that which he covered.1466
55.
then which of the favors of your lord do you doubt?
56.
this [prophet ()] is a warner from [i.e., like] the former 
warners.
57.
the approaching day has approached.
58.
of it, [from those] besides allah, there is no remover.
59.
then at this statement do you wonder?
60.
and you laugh and do not weep
61.
while you are proudly sporting?1467
62.
so prostrate to allah and worship [him].
                                               
1464a star worshipped by some of the pagan arabs.
1465whose inhabitants defied prophet lot.
1466i.e., a rain of stones.
1467additional meanings are "singing [with expanded chest]," "heedless," or 
"lost in vain amusements."

surah 54 – al-qamar
juz 27
537
surah al-qamar
1468
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
the hour has come near, and the moon has split [in two].1469
2.
and if they see a sign [i.e., miracle], they turn away and say, 
"passing magic."1470
3.
and they denied and followed their inclinations.  but for every
matter is a [time of] settlement.
4.
and there has already come to them of information that in 
which there is deterrence –
5.
extensive wisdom – but warning does not avail [them].
6.
so leave them, [o muhammad].  the day the caller1471 calls 
to something forbidding,
7.
their eyes humbled, they will emerge from the graves as if 
they were locusts spreading,
8.
racing ahead toward the caller.  the disbelievers will say, 
"this is a difficult day."
9.
the people of noah denied before them, and they denied our 
servant and said, "a madman," and he was repelled.
10.
so he invoked his lord, "indeed, i am overpowered, so help."
11.
then we opened the gates of the heaven with rain pouring 
down
12.
and caused the earth to burst with springs, and the waters met 
for a matter already predestined.
13.
and we carried him on a [construction of] planks and nails,
                                               
1468al-qamar:  the moon.
1469this was a sign given by allah to prophet muhammad () when the 
quraysh challenged him to show them a miracle.
1470or "continuing magic."
1471said to be an angel announcing the account and judgement.

surah 54 – al-qamar
juz 27
538
14.
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been 
denied.
15.
and we left it as a sign, so is there any who will remember?
16.
and how [severe] were my punishment and warning.1472
17.
and we have certainly made the quran easy for remembrance,
so is there any who will remember?
18.
aad denied; and how [severe] were my punishment and 
warning.
19.
indeed, we sent upon them a screaming wind on a day of 
continuous misfortune,
20.
extracting the people1473 as if they were trunks of palm trees 
uprooted.
21.
and how [severe] were my punishment and warning.
22.
and we have certainly made the quran easy for remembrance,
so is there any who will remember?
23.
thamud denied the warning
24.
and said, "is it one human being1474 among us that we should 
follow?  indeed, we would then be in error and madness.
25.
has the message been sent down upon him from among us? 
rather, he is an insolent liar."
26.
they will know tomorrow who is the insolent liar.
27.
indeed, we are sending the she-camel as trial for them, so watch
them and be patient.1475
28.
and inform them that the water is shared between them,1476
each [day of] drink attended [by turn].
                                               
1472to those after them, who were expected to derive a lesson from previous
occurrences.
1473from their hiding places.
1474i.e., the prophet salih.
1475this and the following verse are an address to salih (upon him be peace).
1476i.e., between the tribe of thamud and the she-camel – a day for each to drink.

surah 54 – al-qamar
juz 27
539
29.
but they called their companion,1477 and he dared1478 and 
hamstrung [her].
30.
and how [severe] were my punishment and warning.
31.
indeed, we sent upon them one shriek [i.e., blast from the sky],
and they became like the dry twig fragments of an [animal] pen.
32.
and we have certainly made the quran easy for remembrance,
so is there any who will remember?
33.
the people of lot denied the warning.
34.
indeed, we sent upon them a storm of stones, except the family
of lot – we saved them before dawn
35.
as favor from us.  thus do we reward he who is grateful.
36.
and he had already warned them of our assault, but they 
disputed the warning.
37.
and they had demanded from him his guests, but we obliterated
their eyes, [saying], "taste my punishment and warning."
38.
and there came upon them by morning an abiding punishment.
39.
so taste my punishment and warning.
40.
and we have certainly made the quran easy for remembrance,
so is there any who will remember?
41.
and there certainly came to the people of pharaoh warning.
42.
they denied our signs, all of them, so we seized them with a 
seizure of one exalted in might and perfect in ability.
43.
are your disbelievers better than those [former ones], or have 
you immunity in the scriptures?
44.
or do they say, "we are an assembly supporting [each other]"?
45.
[their] assembly will be defeated, and they will turn their 
backs [in retreat].1479
                                               
1477i.e., the worst and most despicable among them.
1478or "he took," referring to his sword or to the she-camel.
1479this foretold event took place on the day of badr.

surah 54 – al-qamar
juz 27
540
46.
but the hour is their appointment [for due punishment], and 
the hour is more disastrous and more bitter.
47.
indeed, the criminals are in error and madness.1480
48.
the day they are dragged into the fire on their faces [it will 
be said], "taste the touch of saqar."1481
49.
indeed, all things we created with predestination.
50.
and our command is but one, like a glance of the eye.
51.
and we have already destroyed your kinds,1482 so is there any 
who will remember?
52.
and everything they did is in written records.
53.
and every small and great [thing] is inscribed.
54.
indeed, the righteous will be among gardens and rivers,
55.
in a seat of honor near a sovereign, perfect in ability.
                                               
1480or "in blazing fires."
1481one of the proper names of hell.
1482i.e., those similar to you in attitude and behavior when they rejected 
allah's messengers.


juz 27
541

1483
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
the most merciful
2.
taught the quran,
3.
created man,
4.
[and] taught him eloquence.
5.
the sun and the moon [move] by precise calculation,
6.
and the stars and trees prostrate.1484
7.
and the heaven he raised and imposed the balance
8.
that you not transgress within the balance.
9.
and establish weight in justice and do not make deficient the 
balance.
10.
and the earth he laid [out] for the creatures.
11.
therein is fruit and palm trees having sheaths [of dates]
12.
and grain having husks and scented plants.
13.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?1485
14.
he created man from clay like [that of] pottery.
15.
and he created the jinn from a smokeless flame of fire.
16.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
17.
[he is] lord of the two sunrises and lord of the two sunsets.1486
18.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
19.
he released the two seas,1487 meeting [side by side];
                                               
1483ar-rahman:  the most merciful, or more literally, "the entirely merciful."  
see footnote to 1:1.
1484they submit obediently to the laws of allah.  see 22:18.
1485literally, "you two," addressing the species of mankind and jinn.
1486i.e., the points of sunrise in the east and sunset in the west in both summer
and winter.
1487the two bodies of water:  fresh and salt.


juz 27
542
20.
between them is a barrier [so] neither of them transgresses.
21.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
22.
from both of them emerge pearl and coral.
23.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
24.
and to him belong the ships [with sails] elevated in the sea 
like mountains.
25.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
26.
everyone upon it [i.e., the earth] will perish,
27.
and there will remain the face1488 of your lord, owner of 
majesty and honor.
28.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
29.
whoever is within the heavens and earth asks him; every day 
he is in [i.e., bringing about] a matter.1489
30.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
31.
we will attend to you, o prominent beings.1490
32.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
33.
o company of jinn and mankind, if you are able to pass beyond
the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass.  you will 
not pass except by authority [from allah].
34.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
35.
there will be sent upon you a flame of fire and smoke,1491 and 
you will not defend yourselves.
36.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
37.
and when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored 
like oil1492 –
38.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
                                               
1488see footnote to 2:19.
1489for each of his creatures.
1490specifically two:  mankind and jinn.
1491another possible meaning is liquefied brass or copper.
1492or "like a tanned skin."


juz 27
543
39.
then on that day none will be asked about his sin among men 
or jinn.1493
40.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
41.
the criminals will be known by their marks, and they will be 
seized by the forelocks and the feet.
42.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
43.
this is hell, which the criminals deny.
44.
they will circulate between it and scalding water, heated [to 
the utmost degree].
45.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
46.
but for he who has feared the position of his lord1494 are two 
gardens –
47.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
48.
having [spreading] branches.
49.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
50.
in both of them are two springs, flowing.
51.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
52.
in both of them are of every fruit, two kinds.
53.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
54.
[they are] reclining on beds whose linings are of silk brocade, 
and the fruit of the two gardens is hanging low.
55.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
56.
in them are women limiting [their] glances,1495 untouched1496
before them by man or jinn¥ –
57.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
                                               
1493once they have been condemned to the fire.
1494an alternative meaning is "the standing [for account] before his lord."
1495to their own mates, i.e., being chaste and modest.
1496literally, they have not been caused to bleed by loss of virginity.


juz 27
544
58.
as if they were rubies and coral.1497
59.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
60.
is the reward for good [anything] but good?
61.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
62.
and below them both [in excellence] are two [other] gardens –
63.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
64.
dark green [in color].
65.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
66.
in both of them are two springs, spouting.
67.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
68.
in both of them are fruit and palm trees and pomegranates.
69.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
70.
in them are good and beautiful women –
71.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
72.
fair ones reserved in pavilions –
73.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
74.
untouched before them by man or jinn¥ –
75.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny? –
76.
reclining on green cushions and beautiful fine carpets.
77.
so which of the favors of your lord would you deny?
78.
blessed is the name of your lord, owner of majesty and honor.
                                               
1497in purity, color and beauty.

surah 56 – al-waqiah
juz 27
545
surah al-waqiah
1498
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
when the occurrence occurs,
2.
there is, at its occurrence, no denial.
3.
it will bring down [some] and raise up [others].1499
4.
when the earth is shaken with convulsion
5.
and the mountains are broken down, crumbling
6.
and become dust dispersing,
7.
and you become [of] three kinds:
8.
then the companions of the right – what are the companions 
of the right?1500
9.
and the companions of the left – what are companions of the 
left?1501
10.
and the forerunners, the forerunners1502 –
11.
those are the ones brought near [to allah]
12.
in the gardens of pleasure,
13.
a [large] company of the former peoples
14.
and a few of the later peoples,
15.
on thrones woven [with ornament],
16.
reclining on them, facing each other.
                                               
1498al-waqiah:  the occurrence, literally, "that which befalls," meaning 
the resurrection.
1499according to their deeds rather than wealth and social position, as is the 
case in this world.
1500i.e., those given their records in their right hand and who are destined 
for paradise.
1501i.e., those given their records in their left hand and who are destined for hell.
1502the words can also be understood as a complete sentence, i.e., "the 
forerunners [in good deeds] are the forerunners [in entering paradise]."

surah 56 – al-waqiah
juz 27
546
17.
there will circulate among them young boys made eternal
18.
with vessels, pitchers and a cup [of wine] from a flowing spring –
19.
no headache will they have therefrom, nor will they be intoxicated –
20.
and fruit of what they select
21.
and the meat of fowl, from whatever they desire.
22.
and [for them are] fair women with large, [beautiful] eyes,
23.
the likenesses of pearls well-protected,
24.
as reward for what they used to do.
25.
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin –
26.
only a saying [of] peace, peace.
27.
the companions of the right – what are the companions of the 
right?
28.
[they will be] among lote trees with thorns removed
29.
and [banana] trees layered [with fruit]
30.
and shade extended
31.
and water poured out
32.
and fruit, abundant [and varied],
33.
neither limited [to season] nor forbidden,
34.
and [upon] beds raised high.
35.
indeed, we have produced them [i.e., the women of paradise] 
in a [new] creation
36.
and made them virgins,
37.
devoted [to their husbands] and of equal age,
38.
for the companions of the right [who are]
39.
a company of the former peoples
40.
and a company of the later peoples.
41.
and the companions of the left – what are the companions of 
the left?

surah 56 – al-waqiah
juz 27
547
42.
[they will be] in scorching fire and scalding water
43.
and a shade of black smoke,
44.
neither cool nor beneficial.
45.
indeed they were, before that, indulging in affluence,
46.
and they used to persist in the great violation,1503
47.
and they used to say, "when we die and become dust and bones,
are we indeed to be resurrected?
48.
and our forefathers [as well]?"
49.
say, [o muhammad], "indeed, the former and later peoples
50.
are to be gathered together for the appointment of a known day."
51.
then indeed you, o those astray [who are] deniers,
52.
will be eating from trees of zaqqum
53.
and filling with it your bellies
54.
and drinking on top of it from scalding water
55.
and will drink as the drinking of thirsty camels.
56.
that is their accommodation on the day of recompense.
57.
we have created you, so why do you not believe?
58.
have you seen that which you emit?1504
59.
is it you who creates it, or are we the creator?
60.
we have decreed death among you, and we are not to be outdone
61.
in that we will change your likenesses and produce you in 
that [form] which you do not know.1505
62.
and you have already known the first creation, so will you not 
remember?
                                               
1503i.e., shirk (association with allah) or disbelief.
1504i.e., semen, which contains the potential for human life.
1505an alternative meaning has also been given:  "...in that we will replace 
the likes of you [with others upon the earth] and create you [in the hereafter]
in that which you do not know."

surah 56 – al-waqiah
juz 27
548
63.
and have you seen that [seed] which you sow?
64.
is it you who makes it grow, or are we the grower?
65.
if we willed, we could make it [dry] debris, and you would 
remain in wonder,1506
66.
[saying], "indeed, we are [now] in debt;
67.
rather, we have been deprived."
68.
and have you seen the water that you drink?
69.
is it you who brought it down from the clouds, or is it we who 
bring it down?
70.
if we willed, we could make it bitter, so why are you not 
grateful?
71.
and have you seen the fire that you ignite?
72.
is it you who produced its tree, or are we the producer?
73.
we have made it a reminder1507 and provision for the travelers,1508
74.
so exalt the name of your lord, the most great.
75.
then i swear by the setting of the stars,1509
76.
and indeed, it is an oath – if you could know – [most] great.
77.
indeed, it is a noble quran
78.
in a register well-protected;1510
79.
none touch it except the purified [i.e., the angels].
80.
[it is] a revelation from the lord of the worlds.
                                               
1506at what had happened or remain in a state of shock.  another meaning 
is "in regret."
1507of the great fire of hell.
1508in the form of flints or other means by which to ignite fire.  travelers are
mentioned because of the special convenience to them, although it is a 
provision for all people in general.
1509allah (subhanahu wa taala) confirms absolutely by oath.
1510the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth), which is with allah (subhanahu
wa taala).

surah 56 – al-waqiah
juz 27
549
81.
then is it to this statement that you are indifferent
82.
and make [the thanks for] your provision that you deny [the 
provider]?
83.
then why, when it [i.e., the soul at death] reaches the throat
84.
and you are at that time looking on –
85.
and we [i.e., our angels] are nearer to him than you, but you 
do not see –
86.
then why do you not, if you are not to be recompensed,
87.
bring it back,1511 if you should be truthful?
88.
and if he [i.e., the deceased] was of those brought near [to 
allah],
89.
then [for him is] rest and bounty and a garden of pleasure.
90.
and if he was of the companions of the right,
91.
then [the angels will say], "peace for you; [you are] from the 
companions of the right."
92.
but if he was of the deniers [who were] astray,
93.
then [for him is] accommodation of scalding water
94.
and burning in hellfire.
95.
indeed, this is the true certainty,
96.
so exalt the name of your lord, the most great.
                                               
1511i.e., return the soul to the body, meaning that just as you cannot prevent death 
when it is decreed, you will not escape the recompense when it is decreed.

surah 57 – al-hadeed
juz 27
550
surah al-hadeed
1512
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. whatever is in the heavens and earth exalts allah,1513 and he is 
the exalted in might, the wise.
2. his is the dominion of the heavens and earth.  he gives life and 
causes death, and he is over all things competent.
3. he is the first and the last, the ascendant1514 and the intimate,1515
and he is, of all things, knowing.
4. it is he who created the heavens and earth in six days and then 
established himself above the throne.1516  he knows what 
penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what 
descends from the heaven and what ascends therein; and he is 
with you1517 wherever you are.  and allah, of what you do, is 
seeing.
5. his is the dominion of the heavens and earth.  and to allah are 
returned [all] matters.
6. he causes the night to enter the day and causes the day to enter 
the night, and he is knowing of that within the breasts.
7. believe in allah and his messenger and spend out of that in 
which he has made you successive inheritors.  for those who 
have believed among you and spent,1518 there will be a great 
reward.
                                               
1512al-hadeed:  iron.
1513by praising him and declaring him far above and beyond any failure or 
imperfection.
1514nothing being above him.  another meaning is "the apparent," i.e., 
evident through his creation and revelation.
1515nothing being nearer than him by way of his knowledge.  another
meaning is "the unapparent," i.e., concealed from man's physical senses.
1516see footnote to 2:19.
1517in knowledge – observing and witnessing.
1518in ways pleasing to allah.

surah 57 – al-hadeed
juz 27
551
8.
and why do you not believe in allah while the messenger 
invites you to believe in your lord and he has taken your 
covenant, if you should [truly] be believers?
9.
it is he who sends down upon his servant [muhammad ()] 
verses of clear evidence that he may bring you out from 
darknesses into the light.  and indeed, allah is to you kind 
and merciful.
10.
and why do you not spend in the cause of allah while to 
allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth?  not 
equal among you are those who spent before the conquest [of 
makkah] and fought [and those who did so after it].  those are 
greater in degree than they who spent afterwards and fought.  
but to all allah has promised the best [reward].  and allah, 
with what you do, is acquainted.
11.
who is it that would loan allah a goodly loan so he will 
multiply it for him and he will have a noble reward?
12.
on the day you see the believing men and believing women, 
their light proceeding before them and on their right, [it will 
be said], "your good tidings today are [of] gardens beneath 
which rivers flow, wherein you will abide eternally."  that is 
what is the great attainment.
13.
on the [same] day the hypocrite men and hypocrite women 
will say to those who believed, "wait for us that we may 
acquire some of your light."  it will be said, "go back behind 
you1519 and seek light."  and a wall will be placed between 
them with a door, its interior containing mercy, but on the 
outside of it is torment.
14.
they [i.e., the hypocrites] will call to them [i.e., the believers], 
"were we not with you?"  they will say, "yes, but you afflicted
yourselves1520 and awaited [misfortune for us] and doubted, 
and wishful thinking deluded you until there came the command
of allah.  and the deceiver [i.e., satan] deceived you concerning
allah.
                                               
1519to where light was acquired, i.e., in the worldly life.
1520by hypocrisy or by falling into temptations.

surah 57 – al-hadeed
juz 27
552
15.
so today no ransom will be taken from you or from those who 
disbelieved.  your refuge is the fire.  it is most worthy of you, 
and wretched is the destination."
16.
has the time not come for those who have believed that their 
hearts should become humbly submissive at the remembrance 
of allah and what has come down of the truth?  and let them 
not be like those who were given the scripture before, and a 
long period passed over them, so their hearts hardened; and 
many of them are defiantly disobedient.
17.
know that allah gives life to the earth after its lifelessness.  we 
have made clear to you the signs; perhaps you will understand.1521
18.
indeed, the men who practice charity and the women who 
practice charity and [they who] have loaned allah a goodly 
loan – it will be multiplied for them, and they will have a 
noble reward.
19.
and those who have believed in allah and his messengers –
those are [in the ranks of] the supporters of truth and the 
martyrs, with their lord.  for them is their reward and their 
light.1522  but those who have disbelieved and denied our 
verses – those are the companions of hellfire.
20.
know that the life of this world is but amusement and diversion
and adornment and boasting to one another and competition in 
increase of wealth and children – like the example of a rain 
whose [resulting] plant growth pleases the tillers; then it dries 
and you see it turned yellow; then it becomes [scattered] debris.  
and in the hereafter is severe punishment and forgiveness 
from allah and approval.  and what is the worldly life except 
the enjoyment of delusion.
                                               
1521that similarly, allah (subhanahu wa taala) can soften a heart after its 
hardness and guide one who had previously been astray.
1522another accepted meaning is "and those who have believed in allah 
and his messengers – they are the supporters of truth.  and the martyrs, 
with their lord, will have their reward and their light."

surah 57 – al-hadeed
juz 27
553
21.
race [i.e., compete] toward forgiveness from your lord and a 
garden whose width is like the width of the heavens and earth,
prepared for those who believed in allah and his messengers.  
that is the bounty of allah which he gives to whom he wills, 
and allah is the possessor of great bounty.
22.
no disaster strikes upon the earth or among yourselves except 
that it is in a register1523 before we bring it into being – indeed 
that, for allah, is easy –
23.
in order that you not despair over what has eluded you and not 
exult [in pride] over what he has given you.  and allah does 
not like everyone self-deluded and boastful –
24.
[those] who are stingy and enjoin upon people stinginess.  
and whoever turns away1524 – then indeed, allah is the free 
of need, the praiseworthy.
25.
we have already sent our messengers with clear evidences 
and sent down with them the scripture and the balance that 
the people may maintain [their affairs] in justice.  and we 
sent down iron, wherein is great military might and benefits 
for the people, and so that allah may make evident those who
support him and his messengers unseen.  indeed, allah is 
powerful and exalted in might.
26.
and we have already sent noah and ibrahim and placed in 
their descendants prophethood and scripture; and among them 
is he who is guided, but many of them are defiantly disobedient.
27.
then we sent following their footsteps [i.e., traditions] our 
messengers and followed [them] with jesus, the son of mary, 
and gave him the gospel.  and we placed in the hearts of those
who followed him compassion and mercy and monasticism, 
which they innovated; we did not prescribe it for them except 
[that they did so] seeking the approval of allah.  but they did 
not observe it with due observance.  so we gave the ones who 
                                               
1523i.e., the preserved slate (al-lawh al-mahfuth).
1524refusing to spend for allah's cause or refusing obedience to him.

surah 57 – al-hadeed
juz 27
554
believed among them their reward, but many of them are 
defiantly disobedient.
28.
o you who have believed, fear allah and believe in his 
messenger; he will [then] give you a double portion of his 
mercy and make for you a light by which you will walk and 
forgive you; and allah is forgiving and merciful.
29.
[this is] so that the people of the scripture may know that they 
are not able [to obtain] anything from the bounty of allah1525
and that [all] bounty is in the hand1526 of allah; he gives it to 
whom he wills.  and allah is the possessor of great bounty.
                                               
1525as long as they refuse to believe in the message of allah which was 
conveyed through muhammad ().
1526see footnote to 2:19.

surah 58 – al-mujadilah
juz 28
555
surah al-mujadilah
1527
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. certainly has allah heard the speech of the one who argues [i.e., 
pleads] with you, [o muhammad], concerning her husband and 
directs her complaint to allah.  and allah hears your dialogue; 
indeed, allah is hearing and seeing.
2. those who pronounce thihar1528 among you [to separate] from 
their wives – they are not [consequently] their mothers.  their 
mothers are none but those who gave birth to them.  and indeed,
they are saying an objectionable statement and a falsehood.  but 
indeed, allah is pardoning and forgiving.
3. and those who pronounce thihar from their wives and then 
[wish to] go back on what they said – then [there must be] the 
freeing of a slave before they touch one another.  that is what 
you are admonished thereby; and allah is acquainted with what 
you do.
4. and he who does not find [a slave] – then a fast for two months 
consecutively1529 before they touch one another; and he who is 
unable – then the feeding of sixty poor persons.  that is for you 
to believe [completely] in allah and his messenger; and those 
are the limits [set by] allah.  and for the disbelievers is a 
painful punishment.
5. indeed, those who oppose allah and his messenger are abased 
as those before them were abased.  and we have certainly sent 
down verses of clear evidence.  and for the disbelievers is a 
humiliating punishment
6. on the day when allah will resurrect them all and inform them 
                                               
1527al-mujadilah:  the arguing (or pleading) woman.
1528the saying by a husband to his wife, "you are to me like the back of my 
mother," meaning unlawful to approach.  this was a type of divorce 
practiced by the arabs before the prophethood of muhammad ().
1529see footnote to 4:92.

surah 58 – al-mujadilah
juz 28
556
of what they did.  allah had enumerated it, while they forgot 
it; and allah is, over all things, witness.
7.
have you not considered that allah knows what is in the heavens
and what is on the earth?  there is in no private conversation 
three but that he is the fourth of them,1530 nor are there five 
but that he is the sixth of them – and no less than that and no 
more except that he is with them [in knowledge] wherever 
they are.  then he will inform them of what they did, on the 
day of resurrection.  indeed allah is, of all things, knowing.
8.
have you not considered those who were forbidden from 
private conversation [i.e., ridicule and conspiracy] and then 
return to that which they were forbidden and converse among 
themselves about sin and aggression and disobedience to the 
messenger?  and when they come to you, they greet you with 
that [word] by which allah does not greet you1531 and say 
among themselves, "why does allah not punish us for what 
we say?"  sufficient for them is hell, which they will [enter to]
burn, and wretched is the destination.
9.
o you who have believed, when you converse privately, do 
not converse about sin and aggression and disobedience to the 
messenger but converse about righteousness and piety.  and 
fear allah, to whom you will be gathered.
10.
private conversation is only from satan that he may grieve 
those who have believed,1532 but he will not harm them at all 
except by permission of allah.  and upon allah let the believers
rely.
                                               
1530through his knowledge of them and their secrets.
1531this is in reference to the jews who would greet the muslims with the 
words "death be upon you," rather than "peace."
1532the reference may be to the sinful type of conversation, as mentioned in 
the previous verses, or to the practice of two persons speaking in 
confidence in the presence of a third, which might lead him to assume 
that he is the subject of their conversation.  such behavior was 
prohibited by the prophet () in narrations of al-bukhari and muslim.

surah 58 – al-mujadilah
juz 28
557
11.
o you who have believed, when you are told, "space yourselves"
in assemblies, then make space; allah will make space for 
you.1533  and when you are told, "arise,"1534 then arise; allah 
will raise those who have believed among you and those who 
were given knowledge, by degrees.  and allah is acquainted 
with what you do.
12.
o you who have believed, when you [wish to] privately consult
the messenger, present before your consultation a charity.  that
is better for you and purer.  but if you find not [the means] –
then indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
13.
have you feared to present before your consultation charities?  
then when you do not and allah has forgiven you, then [at 
least] establish prayer and give zakah and obey allah and his 
messenger.  and allah is acquainted with what you do.
14.
have you not considered those who make allies of a people 
with whom allah has become angry?  they are neither of you 
nor of them, and they swear to untruth while they know [they 
are lying].
15.
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment.  indeed, it 
was evil that they were doing.
16.
they took their [false] oaths as a cover, so they averted [people] 
from the way of allah, and for them is a humiliating punishment.
17.
never will their wealth or their children avail them against 
allah at all.  those are the companions of the fire; they will 
abide therein eternally
18.
on the day allah will resurrect them all, and they will swear 
to him as they swear to you and think that they are [standing] 
on something.1535  unquestionably, it is they who are the liars.
19.
satan has overcome them and made them forget the remembrance
                                               
1533in his mercy, in paradise, or in everything good.
1534to prayer, to battle, or to good deeds.
1535they assume that their lies will be believed and that they will escape 
detection as they did in worldly life.

surah 58 – al-mujadilah
juz 28
558
of allah.  those are the party of satan.  unquestionably, the 
party of satan – they will be the losers.
20.
indeed, the ones who oppose allah and his messenger – those 
will be among the most humbled.
21.
allah has written [i.e., decreed], "i will surely overcome, i and
my messengers."  indeed, allah is powerful and exalted in might.
22.
you will not find a people who believe in allah and the last day
having affection for those who oppose allah and his messenger,
even if they were their fathers or their sons or their brothers or 
their kindred.  those – he has decreed within their hearts faith 
and supported them with spirit1536 from him.  and we will
admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they
abide eternally.  allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased
with him – those are the party of allah.  unquestionably, the 
party of allah – they are the successful.
                                               
1536i.e., "that which gives life," explained as the guidance of the quran or 
victory over their opponents.

surah 59 – al-hashr
juz 28
559
surah al-hashr
1537
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth exalts 
allah,1538 and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
2. it is he who expelled the ones who disbelieved among the people
of the scripture1539 from their homes at the first gathering.1540  
you did not think they would leave, and they thought that their 
fortresses would protect them from allah; but [the decree of] 
allah came upon them from where they had not expected, and 
he cast terror into their hearts [so] they destroyed their houses 
by their [own] hands and the hands of the believers.  so take 
warning, o people of vision.
3. and if not that allah had decreed for them evacuation, he would
have punished them in [this] world, and for them in the hereafter
is the punishment of the fire.
4. that is because they opposed allah and his messenger.  and 
whoever opposes allah – then indeed, allah is severe in penalty.
5. whatever you have cut down of [their] palm trees or left standing
on their trunks – it was by permission of allah and so he would 
disgrace the defiantly disobedient.
6. and what allah restored [of property] to his messenger from 
them – you did not spur for it [in an expedition] any horses or 
camels,1541 but allah gives his messengers power over whom 
he wills, and allah is over all things competent.
7. and what allah restored to his messenger from the people of 
the towns – it is for allah and for the messenger and for [his] 
                                               
1537al-hashr:  the gathering.
1538see footnote to 57:1.
1539referring to the jews of banun-nadheer, who broke their pact with the 
messenger of allah ().
1540this was the first tme they had ever been gathered and expelled.
1541meaning that they went through no hardship (i.e., war) to obtain it.

surah 59 – al-hashr
juz 28
560
near relatives1542 and orphans and the [stranded] traveler1543 –
so that it will not be a perpetual distribution among the rich 
from among you.  and whatever the messenger has given you –
take; and what he has forbidden you – refrain from.  and fear 
allah; indeed, allah is severe in penalty.
8.
for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and 
their properties, seeking bounty from allah and [his] approval
and supporting allah and his messenger, [there is also a share].  
those are the truthful.
9.
and [also for] those who were settled in the home [i.e., 
al-madinah] and [adopted] the faith before them.1544  they 
love those who emigrated to them and find not any want in 
their breasts of what they [i.e., the emigrants] were given but 
give [them] preference over themselves, even though they are 
in privation.  and whoever is protected from the stinginess of 
his soul – it is those who will be the successful.
10.
and [there is a share for] those who came after them, saying, 
"our lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith
and put not in our hearts [any] resentment toward those who 
have believed.  our lord, indeed you are kind and merciful."
11.
have you not considered those who practice hypocrisy, saying 
to their brothers [i.e., associates] who have disbelieved among 
the people of the scripture, "if you are expelled, we will surely
leave with you, and we will not obey, in regard to you, anyone –
ever; and if you are fought, we will surely aid you."  but allah 
testifies that they are liars.
12.
if they are expelled, they will not leave with them, and if they 
                                               
1542those of banu hashim and banu muttalib, whom he () had prohibited
from accepting zakah.
1543this ruling concerning properties abandoned by an enemy without a war 
effort differs from that in surah al-anfal, verse 41, which refers to 
spoils of war in which four fifths is distributed among those who fought 
in allah's cause.
1544before the settlement of the emigrants (muhajireen) among the ansar, 
for whom a share is delegated as well.

surah 59 – al-hashr
juz 28
561
are fought, they will not aid them.  and [even] if they should 
aid them, they will surely turn their backs; then [thereafter] 
they will not be aided.
13.
you [believers] are more fearful within their breasts than allah.  
that is because they are a people who do not understand.
14.
they will not fight you all except within fortified cities or from
behind walls.  their violence [i.e., enmity] among themselves 
is severe.  you think they are together, but their hearts are 
diverse. that is because they are a people who do not reason.
15.
[theirs is] like the example of those shortly before them:  they 
tasted the bad consequence of their affair, and they will have a 
painful punishment.
16.
[the hypocrites are] like the example of satan when he says 
to man, "disbelieve."  but when he disbelieves, he says, 
"indeed, i am disassociated from you.  indeed, i fear allah, 
lord of the worlds."
17.
so the outcome for both of them is that they will be in the fire,
abiding eternally therein.  and that is the recompense of the 
wrongdoers.
18.
o you who have believed, fear allah.  and let every soul look 
to what it has put forth for tomorrow – and fear allah.  
indeed, allah is acquainted with what you do.
19.
and be not like those who forgot allah, so he made them 
forget themselves.  those are the defiantly disobedient.
20.
not equal are the companions of the fire and the companions 
of paradise.  the companions of paradise – they are the attainers
[of success].
21.
if we had sent down this quran upon a mountain, you would 
have seen it humbled and splitting from fear of allah.  and 
these examples we present to the people that perhaps they 
will give thought.
22.
he is allah, other than whom there is no deity, knower of the 

surah 59 – al-hashr
juz 28
562
unseen and the witnessed.1545  he is the entirely merciful, the 
especially merciful.
23.
he is allah, other than whom there is no deity, the sovereign, 
the pure, the perfection,1546 the bestower of faith,1547 the 
overseer, the exalted in might, the compeller, the superior.  
exalted is allah above whatever they associate with him.
24.
he is allah, the creator, the inventor, the fashioner; to him 
belong the best names.1548  whatever is in the heavens and earth
is exalting him.  and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
                                               
1545see footnotes to 6:73.
1546literally, "free" from any imperfection or "the security."
1547or "of safety."
1548refer to the final paragraphs of the "introduction" for a brief discussion 
of these attributes.

surah 60 – al-mumtahinah
juz 28
563
surah al-mumtahinah
1549
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o you who have believed, do not take my enemies and your 
enemies as allies,1550 extending to them affection while they 
have disbelieved in what came to you of the truth, having driven 
out the prophet and yourselves [only] because you believe in 
allah, your lord.  if you have come out for jihad [i.e., fighting 
or striving] in my cause and seeking means to my approval, 
[take them not as friends].  you confide to them affection [i.e., 
instruction], but i am most knowing of what you have 
concealed and what you have declared.  and whoever does it 
among you has certainly strayed from the soundness of the way.
2. if they gain dominance over you, they would be [i.e., behave] to 
you as enemies and extend against you their hands and their 
tongues with evil, and they wish you would disbelieve.
3. never will your relatives or your children benefit you; the day 
of resurrection he will judge between you.  and allah, of what 
you do, is seeing.
4. there has already been for you an excellent pattern1551 in 
ibrahim and those with him, when they said to their people, 
"indeed, we are disassociated from you and from whatever you 
worship other than allah.  we have denied you, and there has 
appeared between us and you animosity and hatred forever until 
you believe in allah alone" – except for the saying of ibrahim 
to his father, "i will surely ask forgiveness for you, but i have 
not [power to do] for you anything against allah.  our lord, 
upon you we have relied, and to you we have returned, and to 
you is the destination.
                                               
1549al-mumtahinah:  that (surah) which examines.  also called "al-mumtahanah,"
meaning "the woman examined."
1550i.e., close associates and friends.
1551an example to be followed.

surah 60 – al-mumtahinah
juz 28
564
5.
our lord, make us not [objects of] torment for the disbelievers
and forgive us, our lord.  indeed, it is you who is the exalted 
in might, the wise."
6.
there has certainly been for you in them an excellent pattern 
for anyone whose hope is in allah and the last day.  and 
whoever turns away – then indeed, allah is the free of need, 
the praiseworthy.
7.
perhaps allah will put, between you and those to whom you have 
been enemies among them, affection.  and allah is competent,1552
and allah is forgiving and merciful.
8.
allah does not forbid you from those who do not fight you 
because of religion and do not expel you from your homes –
from being righteous toward them and acting justly toward 
them.  indeed, allah loves those who act justly.
9.
allah only forbids you from those who fight you because of 
religion and expel you from your homes and aid in your 
expulsion – [forbids] that you make allies1553 of them.  and 
whoever makes allies of them, then it is those who are the 
wrongdoers.
10.
o you who have believed, when the believing women come to 
you as emigrants, examine [i.e., test] them.  allah is most 
knowing as to their faith.  and if you know them to be 
believers, then do not return them to the disbelievers; they are 
not lawful [wives] for them, nor are they lawful [husbands] 
for them.  but give them [i.e., the disbelievers] what they have 
spent.1554  and there is no blame upon you if you marry them 
when you have given them their due compensation [i.e., mahr].  
and hold not to marriage bonds with disbelieving women, but 
ask for what you have spent and let them [i.e., the disbelievers]
ask for what they have spent.1555  that is the judgement of 
                                               
1552to accomplish this or whatever he should will.
1553see footnote to verse 1 of this surah.
1554for marriage, i.e., compensate their loss.
1555when a disbelieving wife chose to join the disbelievers, a muslim 

surah 60 – al-mumtahinah
juz 28
565
allah; he judges between you.  and allah is knowing and wise.
11.
and if you have lost any of your wives to the disbelievers and 
you subsequently obtain [something],1556 then give those 
whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent.  
and fear allah, in whom you are believers.
12.
o prophet, when the believing women come to you pledging 
to you that they will not associate anything with allah, nor will 
they steal, nor will they commit unlawful sexual intercourse,
nor will they kill their children, nor will they bring forth a 
slander they have invented between their arms and legs,1557
nor will they disobey you in what is right – then accept their 
pledge and ask forgiveness for them of allah.  indeed, allah 
is forgiving and merciful.
13.
o you who have believed, do not make allies of a people with 
whom allah has become angry.  they have despaired of 
[reward in] the hereafter just as the disbelievers have despaired
of [meeting] the companions [i.e., inhabitants] of the graves.
                                                                      
husband could demand in return the equivalent of her mahr.  likewise, 
the disbelievers had a similar right when a believing woman joined the 
muslims.  this and the following verses were revealed subsequent to 
the treaty of al-hudaybiyyah.
1556from the side of the disbelievers, i.e., war booty or a believing woman 
seeking refuge with the muslims.
1557this is an allusion to pregnancy and childbirth, i.e., to falsely attribute a 
child (whether adopted or born of adultery) to a woman's husband.

surah 61 – a§-saff
juz 28
566
surah a§-saff
1558
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth exalts 
allah,1559 and he is the exalted in might, the wise.
2. o you who have believed, why do you say what you do not do?
3. great is hatred in the sight of allah that you say what you do 
not do.
4. indeed, allah loves those who fight in his cause in a row as 
though they are a [single] structure joined firmly.
5. and [mention, o muhammad], when moses said to his people, 
"o my people, why do you harm me while you certainly know 
that i am the messenger of allah to you?"  and when they 
deviated, allah caused their hearts to deviate.  and allah does
not guide the defiantly disobedient people.
6. and [mention] when jesus, the son of mary, said, "o children 
of israel, indeed i am the messenger of allah to you confirming 
what came before me of the torah and bringing good tidings of 
a messenger to come after me, whose name is ahmad."1560  but 
when he came to them with clear evidences, they said, "this is 
obvious magic."1561
7. and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth
while he is being invited to islam.  and allah does not guide the
wrongdoing people.
8. they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths, but
allah will perfect his light, although the disbelievers dislike it.
9. it is he who sent his messenger with guidance and the religion 
of truth to manifest it over all religion, although those who associate
others with allah dislike it.
                                               
1558a§-saff:  the row.
1559see footnote to 57:1.
1560another name of prophet muhammad ().
1561i.e., fraud or deception.

surah 61 – a§-saff
juz 28
567
10.
o you who have believed, shall i guide you to a transaction 
that will save you from a painful punishment?
11.
[it is that] you believe in allah and his messenger and strive 
in the cause of allah with your wealth and your lives.  that is 
best for you, if you should know.
12.
he will forgive for you your sins and admit you to gardens 
beneath which rivers flow and pleasant dwellings in gardens 
of perpetual residence.  that is the great attainment.
13.
and [you will obtain] another [favor] that you love – victory 
from allah and an imminent conquest; and give good tidings 
to the believers.
14.
o you who have believed, be supporters of allah, as when 
jesus, the son of mary, said to the disciples, "who are my 
supporters for allah?"  the disciples said, "we are supporters 
of allah."  and a faction of the children of israel believed and
a faction disbelieved.  so we supported those who believed 
against their enemy, and they became dominant.

surah 62 – al-jumuah
juz 28
568
surah al-jumuah
1562
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth is 
exalting allah,1563 the sovereign, the pure, the exalted in might, 
the wise.
2. it is he who has sent among the unlettered [arabs] a messenger 
from themselves reciting to them his verses and purifying them 
and teaching them the book [i.e., the quran] and wisdom [i.e., 
the sunnah] – although they were before in clear error –
3. and [to] others of them who have not yet joined them.  and he 
is the exalted in might, the wise.
4. that is the bounty of allah, which he gives to whom he wills, 
and allah is the possessor of great bounty.
5. the example of those who were entrusted with the torah and 
then did not take it on1564 is like that of a donkey who carries 
volumes [of books].1565 wretched is the example of the people 
who deny the signs of allah.  and allah does not guide the 
wrongdoing people.
6. say, "o you who are jews, if you claim that you are allies of 
allah, excluding the [other] people, then wish for death, if you 
should be truthful."
7. but they will not wish for it, ever, because of what their hands 
have put forth.  and allah is knowing of the wrongdoers.
8. say, "indeed, the death from which you flee – indeed, it will meet
you.  then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and
the witnessed, and he will inform you about what you used to do."
                                               
1562al-jumuah:  friday.
1563see footnote to 57:1.
1564i.e., neglected their responsibility towards it by not putting its teachings 
into practice.
1565but does not benefit from their contents.

surah 62 – al-jumuah
juz 28
569
9.
o you who have believed, when [the adhan] is called for the 
prayer on the day of jumuah [friday], then proceed to the 
remembrance of allah and leave trade.  that is better for you, 
if you only knew.
10.
and when the prayer has been concluded, disperse within the 
land and seek from the bounty of allah, and remember allah 
often that you may succeed.
11.
but [on one occasion] when they saw a transaction or a diversion,
[o muhammad], they rushed to it and left you standing.  say, 
"what is with allah is better than diversion and than a transaction,
and allah is the best of providers."

surah 63 – al-munafiqun
juz 28
570
surah al-munafiqun
1566
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. when the hypocrites come to you, [o muhammad], they say, 
"we testify that you are the messenger of allah."  and allah 
knows that you are his messenger, and allah testifies that the 
hypocrites are liars.
2. they have taken their oaths as a cover, so they averted [people] 
from the way of allah.  indeed, it was evil that they were doing.
3. that is because they believed, and then they disbelieved; so 
their hearts were sealed over, and they do not understand.
4. and when you see them, their forms please you, and if they 
speak, you listen to their speech.  [they are] as if they were 
pieces of wood propped up1567 – they think that every shout is 
against them.  they are the enemy, so beware of them.  may 
allah destroy them; how are they deluded?
5. and when it is said to them, "come, the messenger of allah 
will ask forgiveness for you," they turn their heads aside and 
you see them evading while they are arrogant.
6. it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or 
do not ask forgiveness for them; never will allah forgive them.  
indeed, allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people.
7. they are the ones who say, "do not spend on those who are with 
the messenger of allah until they disband."  and to allah belongs 
the depositories of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites
do not understand.
8. they say, "if we return to al-madinah, the more honored [for 
power] will surely expel therefrom the more humble."  and to 
allah belongs [all] honor, and to his messenger, and to the 
believers, but the hypocrites do not know.
                                               
1566al-munafiqun:  the hypocrites.
1567i.e., bodies with empty minds and empty hearts.

surah 63 – al-munafiqun
juz 28
571
9.
o you who have believed, let not your wealth and your children
divert you from the remembrance of allah.  and whoever does
that – then those are the losers.
10.
and spend [in the way of allah] from what we have provided
you before death approaches one of you and he says, "my lord,
if only you would delay me for a brief term so i would give 
charity and be among the righteous."
11.
but never will allah delay a soul when its time has come.  
and allah is acquainted with what you do.

surah 64 – at-taghabun
juz 28
572
surah at-taghabun
1568
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth is 
exalting allah.1569  to him belongs dominion, and to him 
belongs [all] praise, and he is over all things competent.
2. it is he who created you, and among you is the disbeliever, and 
among you is the believer.  and allah, of what you do, is seeing.
3. he created the heavens and earth in truth and formed you and 
perfected your forms; and to him is the [final] destination.
4. he knows what is within the heavens and earth and knows what 
you conceal and what you declare.  and allah is knowing of 
that within the breasts.
5. has there not come to you the news of those who disbelieved 
before?  so they tasted the bad consequence of their affair, and 
they will have a painful punishment.
6. that is because their messengers used to come to them with 
clear evidences, but they said, "shall human beings guide us?" 
and disbelieved and turned away.  and allah dispensed [with 
them]; and allah is free of need and praiseworthy.
7. those who disbelieve have claimed that they will never be
resurrected.  say, "yes, by my lord, you will surely be resurrected; 
then you will surely be informed of what you did.  and that, for 
allah, is easy."
8. so believe in allah and his messenger and the light [i.e., the 
quran] which we have sent down.  and allah is acquainted 
with what you do.
9. the day he will assemble you for the day of assembly – that 
                                               
1568at-taghabun:  deprivation, another name for the day of judgement.  
see footnote 1569.
1569see footnote to 57:1.

surah 64 – at-taghabun
juz 28
573
is the day of deprivation.1570  and whoever believes in allah 
and does righteousness – he will remove from him his 
misdeeds and admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow, 
wherein they will abide forever.  that is the great attainment.
10.
but the ones who disbelieved and denied our verses – those 
are the companions of the fire, abiding eternally therein; and 
wretched is the destination.
11.
no disaster strikes except by permission of allah.  and whoever
believes in allah – he will guide his heart.  and allah is knowing
of all things.
12.
and obey allah and obey the messenger; but if you turn away –
then upon our messenger is only [the duty of] clear notification.
13.
allah – there is no deity except him.  and upon allah let the 
believers rely.
14.
o you who have believed, indeed, among your spouses and 
your children are enemies to you, so beware of them.  but if 
you pardon and overlook and forgive – then indeed, allah is 
forgiving and merciful.
15.
your wealth and your children are but a trial, and allah has 
with him a great reward.
16.
so fear allah as much as you are able and listen and obey and 
spend [in the way of allah]; it is better for your selves.  and 
whoever is protected from the stinginess of his soul – it is 
those who will be the successful.
17.
if you loan allah a goodly loan, he will multiply it for you and 
forgive you.  and allah is most appreciative and forbearing,
18.
knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the exalted in might,
the wise.
                                               
1570"at-taghabun" suggests having been outdone by others in the acquisition
of something valued.  that day, the disbelievers will suffer the loss of 
paradise to the believers.

surah 65 – a‹-talaq
juz 28
574
surah a‹-talaq
1571
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o prophet, when you [muslims] divorce women, divorce them 
for [the commencement of] their waiting period and keep count 
of the waiting period,1572 and fear allah, your lord.  do not turn 
them out of their [husbands'] houses, nor should they [themselves]
leave [during that period] unless they are committing a clear 
immorality.  and those are the limits [set by] allah.  and 
whoever transgresses the limits of allah has certainly wronged 
himself.  you know not; perhaps allah will bring about after 
that a [different] matter.1573
2. and when they have [nearly] fulfilled their term, either retain 
them according to acceptable terms or part with them according 
to acceptable terms.  and bring to witness two just men from 
among you and establish the testimony for [the acceptance of] 
allah.  that is instructed to whoever should believe in allah 
and the last day.  and whoever fears allah – he will make for 
him a way out1574
3. and will provide for him from where he does not expect.  and
whoever relies upon allah – then he is sufficient for him.  indeed,
allah will accomplish his purpose.  allah has already set for 
everything a [decreed] extent.
4. and those who no longer expect menstruation among your 
women – if you doubt, then their period is three months, and 
[also for] those who have not menstruated.  and for those who
                                               
1571a‹-talaq:  divorce.
1572see rulings in 2:228-233.  a wife should not be divorced except after 
the completion of her menstrual period but before sexual intercourse has 
occurred, or else during a confirmed pregnancy.  the pronouncement of 
divorce begins her waiting period (iddah).
1573such as regret or renewed desire for the wife.
1574i.e., relief from distress.

surah 65 – a‹-talaq
juz 28
575
are pregnant, their term is until they give birth.1575  and 
whoever fears allah – he will make for him of his matter ease.
5.
that is the command of allah, which he has sent down to you;
and whoever fears allah – he will remove for him his misdeeds 
and make great for him his reward.
6.
lodge them1576 [in a section] of where you dwell out of your
means and do not harm them in order to oppress them.1577  
and if they should be pregnant, then spend on them until they 
give birth.  and if they breastfeed for you, then give them their
payment and confer among yourselves in the acceptable way; 
but if you are in discord, then there may breastfeed for him 
[i.e., the father] another woman.1578
7.
let a man of wealth spend from his wealth, and he whose 
provision is restricted – let him spend from what allah has 
given him.  allah does not charge a soul except [according to] 
what he has given it.  allah will bring about, after hardship, 
ease [i.e., relief].
8.
and how many a city was insolent toward the command of its 
lord and his messengers, so we took it to severe account and 
punished it with a terrible punishment.
9.
and it tasted the bad consequence of its affair [i.e., rebellion], 
and the outcome of its affair was loss.
10.
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment; so fear allah,
o you of understanding who have believed.  allah has sent 
down to you a message [i.e., the quran].1579
11.
[he sent] a messenger [i.e., muhammad ()] reciting to you 
                                               
1575the ruling concerning pregnancy applies also in the case of the husband's
death.
1576during their waiting period (referring to wives whose divorce has been 
pronounced).
1577so that they would be forced to leave or to ransom themselves.
1578see 2:233.
1579some scholars have interpreted "dhikr" here as "a reminder," meaning 
the messenger (), since he is mentioned in the following verse.

surah 65 – a‹-talaq
juz 28
576
the distinct verses of allah that he may bring out those who 
believe and do righteous deeds from darknesses into the light.  
and whoever believes in allah and does righteousness – he 
will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide
therein forever.  allah will have perfected for him a provision.
12.
it is allah who has created seven heavens and of the earth, the 
like of them.1580  [his] command descends among them so you 
may know that allah is over all things competent and that 
allah has encompassed all things in knowledge.
                                               
1580i.e., a similar number:  seven.

surah 66 – at-tahreem
juz 28
577
surah at-tahreem
1581
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. o prophet, why do you prohibit [yourself from] what allah has 
made lawful for you, seeking the approval of your wives?  and 
allah is forgiving and merciful.
2. allah has already ordained for you [muslims] the dissolution of 
your oaths.1582  and allah is your protector, and he is the 
knowing, the wise.
3. and [remember] when the prophet confided to one of his wives 
a statement; and when she informed [another] of it and allah 
showed it to him, he made known part of it and ignored a part.  
and when he informed her about it, she said, "who told you this?"  
he said, "i was informed by the knowing, the acquainted."
4. if you two [wives] repent to allah, [it is best], for your hearts 
have deviated.  but if you cooperate against him – then indeed 
allah is his protector, and gabriel and the righteous of the 
believers and the angels, moreover, are [his] assistants.
5. perhaps his lord, if he divorced you [all], would substitute for 
him wives better than you – submitting [to allah], believing, 
devoutly obedient, repentant, worshipping, and traveling1583 –
[ones] previously married and virgins.
6. o you who have believed, protect yourselves and your families 
from a fire whose fuel is people and stones, over which are 
[appointed] angels, harsh and severe; they do not disobey allah 
in what he commands them but do what they are commanded.
7. o you who have disbelieved, make no excuses that day.  you 
will only be recompensed for what you used to do.
                                               
1581at-tahreem:  prohibition.
1582by means of a kaffarah (expiation).  this is required when one is unable 
to fulfill an oath or when one has taken an oath which would not be 
pleasing to allah (subhanahu wa taala).  see 5:89.
1583emigrating for the cause of allah.

surah 66 – at-tahreem
juz 28
578
8.
o you who have believed, repent to allah with sincere repentance.  
perhaps1584 your lord will remove from you your misdeeds 
and admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow [on] the 
day when allah will not disgrace the prophet and those who 
believed with him.  their light will proceed before them and 
on their right; they will say, "our lord, perfect for us our light 
and forgive us.  indeed, you are over all things competent."
9.
o prophet, strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites 
and be harsh upon them.  and their refuge is hell, and wretched
is the destination.
10.
allah presents an example of those who disbelieved:  the wife 
of noah and the wife of lot.  they were under two of our 
righteous servants but betrayed them,1585 so they [i.e., those 
prophets] did not avail them from allah at all, and it was said, 
"enter the fire with those who enter."
11.
and allah presents an example of those who believed:  the 
wife of pharaoh, when she said, "my lord, build for me near 
you a house in paradise and save me from pharaoh and his 
deeds and save me from the wrongdoing people."
12.
and [the example of] mary, the daughter of imran, who 
guarded her chastity, so we blew into [her garment] through 
our angel [i.e., gabriel], and she believed in the words of her 
lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient.
                                               
1584i.e., it is expected or promised.
1585in the matter of religion.

surah 67 – al-mulk
juz 29
579
surah al-mulk
1586
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
blessed is he in whose hand is dominion, and he is over all 
things competent –
2.
[he] who created death and life to test you [as to] which of you
is best in deed – and he is the exalted in might, the forgiving –
3.
[and] who created seven heavens in layers.1587  you do not 
see in the creation of the most merciful any inconsistency.  so 
return [your] vision [to the sky]; do you see any breaks?
4.
then return [your] vision twice again.1588  [your] vision will 
return to you humbled while it is fatigued.
5.
and we have certainly beautified the nearest heaven with 
lamps [i.e., stars] and have made [from] them what is thrown 
at the devils1589 and have prepared for them the punishment of 
the blaze.
6.
and for those who disbelieved in their lord is the punishment 
of hell, and wretched is the destination.
7.
when they are thrown into it, they hear from it a [dreadful] 
inhaling while it boils up.
8.
it almost bursts with rage.  every time a company is thrown into 
it, its keepers ask them, "did there not come to you a warner?"
9.
they will say, "yes, a warner had come to us, but we denied 
and said, 'allah has not sent down anything.  you are not but 
in great error.'"
10.
and they will say, "if only we had been listening or reasoning,
we would not be among the companions of the blaze."
                                               
1586al-mulk:  dominion.
1587i.e., one covering or fitting over the other.
1588i.e., repeatedly.
1589thereby driving them from the heavens and preventing them from 
eavesdropping.  see 72:8-9.

surah 67 – al-mulk
juz 29
580
11.
and they will admit their sin, so [it is] alienation1590 for the 
companions of the blaze.
12.
indeed, those who fear their lord unseen will have forgiveness
and great reward.
13.
and conceal your speech or publicize it; indeed, he is knowing
of that within the breasts.
14.
does he who created not know,1591 while he is the subtle, the 
acquainted?
15.
it is he who made the earth tame1592 for you – so walk among 
its slopes and eat of his provision – and to him is the resurrection.
16.
do you feel secure that he who [holds authority] in the heaven 
would not cause the earth to swallow you and suddenly it would
sway?1593
17.
or do you feel secure that he who [holds authority] in the 
heaven would not send against you a storm of stones?  then 
you would know how [severe] was my warning.
18.
and already had those before them denied, and how [terrible] 
was my reproach.
19.
do they not see the birds above them with wings outspread 
and [sometimes] folded in?  none holds them [aloft] except 
the most merciful.  indeed he is, of all things, seeing.
20.
or who is it that could be an army for you to aid you other than
the most merciful?  the disbelievers are not but in delusion.
21.
or who is it that could provide for you if he withheld his 
provision?  but they have persisted in insolence and aversion.
22.
then is one who walks fallen on his face better guided or one 
who walks erect on a straight path?
23.
say, "it is he who has produced you and made for you hearing
and vision and hearts [i.e., intellect]; little are you grateful."
                                               
1590from all good and from allah's mercy.
1591another accepted meaning is "does he not know those whom he created...?"
1592i.e., stable and subservient.
1593in a circular motion, as in an earthquake.

surah 67 – al-mulk
juz 29
581
24.
say, "it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth, 
and to him you will be gathered."
25.
and they say, "when is this promise, if you should be truthful?"
26.
say, "the knowledge is only with allah, and i am only a clear 
warner."
27.
but when they see it1594 approaching, the faces of those who 
disbelieve will be distressed, and it will be said, "this is that 
for which you used to call."1595
28.
say, [o muhammad], "have you considered:1596  whether allah 
should cause my death and those with me or have mercy upon
us, who can protect the disbelievers from a painful punishment?"
29.
say, "he is the most merciful; we have believed in him, and 
upon him we have relied.  and you will [come to] know who 
it is that is in clear error."
30.
say, "have you considered:  if your water was to become 
sunken [into the earth], then who could bring you flowing 
water?"
                                               
1594the punishment of which they were warned.
1595when they challenged their prophets, saying, "bring on the punishment, 
if you are truthful."
1596i.e., inform me.

surah 68 – al-qalam
juz 29
582
surah al-qalam
1597
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
nun.1598  by the pen and what they inscribe,
2.
you are not, [o muhammad], by the favor of your lord, a 
madman.
3.
and indeed, for you is a reward uninterrupted.
4.
and indeed, you are of a great moral character.
5.
so you will see and they will see
6.
which of you is the afflicted [by a devil].
7.
indeed, your lord is most knowing of who has gone astray 
from his way, and he is most knowing of the [rightly] guided.
8.
then do not obey the deniers.
9.
they wish that you would soften [in your position], so they 
would soften [toward you].
10.
and do not obey every worthless habitual swearer
11.
[and] scorner, going about with malicious gossip –
12.
a preventer of good, transgressing and sinful,
13.
cruel, moreover, and an illegitimate pretender.1599
14.
because he is a possessor of wealth and children,
15.
when our verses are recited to him, he says, "legends of the 
former peoples."
16.
we will brand him upon the snout.1600
                                               
1597al-qalam:  the pen.
1598see footnote to 2:1.
1599i.e., claiming a particular lineage falsely.  the description given in these 
verses is of al-waleed bin al-mugheerah (see also 74:11-25) or possibly, 
as asserted by ibn katheer, al-akhnas bin shurayq.
1600literally, "trunk," meaning the nose of an elephant or pig.

surah 68 – al-qalam
juz 29
583
17.
indeed, we have tried them as we tried the companions of the 
garden, when they swore to cut its fruit in the [early] morning
18.
without making exception.1601
19.
so there came upon it [i.e., the garden] an affliction from your 
lord while they were asleep.
20.
and it became as though reaped.
21.
and they called one another at morning,
22.
[saying], "go early to your crop if you would cut the fruit."
23.
so they set out, while lowering their voices,
24.
[saying], "there will surely not enter it today upon you [any] 
poor person."
25.
and they went early in determination, [assuming themselves] 
able.1602
26.
but when they saw it, they said, "indeed, we are lost;
27.
rather, we have been deprived."
28.
the most moderate of them said, "did i not say to you, 'why 
do you not exalt [allah]?'"1603
29.
they said, "exalted is our lord!  indeed, we were wrongdoers."
30.
then they approached one another, blaming each other.
31.
they said, "o woe to us; indeed we were transgressors.
32.
perhaps our lord will substitute for us [one] better than it.  
indeed, we are toward our lord desirous."1604
33.
such is the punishment [of this world].  and the punishment 
of the hereafter is greater, if they only knew.
                                               
1601i.e., without conceding that nothing can be accomplished unless allah 
wills, saying, "...if allah wills" ("in-sha-allah").  see 18:23-24.
1602to carry out their plan, confident of their ability.
1603i.e., remember or mention him by saying, "...if allah wills."  an additional
meaning is "praise" or "thank" him for his bounty.
1604of his mercy, forgiveness and bounty.

surah 68 – al-qalam
juz 29
584
34.
indeed, for the righteous with their lord are the gardens of 
pleasure.
35.
then will we treat the muslims like the criminals?
36.
what is [the matter] with you?  how do you judge?
37.
or do you have a scripture in which you learn
38.
that indeed for you is whatever you choose?
39.
or do you have oaths [binding] upon us, extending until the 
day of resurrection, that indeed for you is whatever you judge?
40.
ask them which of them, for that [claim], is responsible.
41.
or do they have partners?1605  then let them bring their partners,
if they should be truthful.
42.
the day the shin will be uncovered1606 and they are invited to 
prostration but they [i.e., the disbelievers] will not be able,
43.
their eyes humbled, humiliation will cover them.  and they 
used to be invited to prostration while they were sound.1607
44.
so leave me, [o muhammad], with [the matter of] whoever 
denies this statement [i.e., the quran].  we will progressively 
lead them [to punishment] from where they do not know.1608
45.
and i will give them time.  indeed, my plan is firm.
46.
or do you ask of them a payment, so they are by debt burdened
down?
47.
or have they [knowledge of] the unseen, so they write [it] down?
48.
then be patient for the decision of your lord, [o muhammad],
                                               
1605i.e., those to whom they attribute divinity other than allah or partners 
from among themselves.
1606i.e., when everyone will find before him great difficulty.  in accordance 
with authentic hadiths, "the shin" might also refer to that of allah 
(subhanahu wa taala), before which every believer will prostrate on the 
day of judgement.  see footnote to 2:19.
1607during worldly life.
1608allah will increase his favors to them in this world by way of trial, 
whereby they will sink deeper into sin and thus into destruction.

surah 68 – al-qalam
juz 29
585
and be not like the companion of the fish [i.e., jonah] when he 
called out while he was distressed.
49.
if not that a favor [i.e., mercy] from his lord overtook him, he 
would have been thrown onto the naked shore while he was 
censured.1609
50.
and his lord chose him and made him of the righteous.
51.
and indeed, those who disbelieve would almost make you slip 
with their eyes [i.e., looks] when they hear the message, and 
they say, "indeed, he is mad."
52.
but it is not except a reminder to the worlds.
                                               
1609but instead, allah accepted his repentance and provided means for his 
recovery.  see 37:139-148.

surah 69 – al-haqqah
juz 29
586
surah al-haqqah
1610
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
the inevitable reality –
2.
what is the inevitable reality?
3.
and what can make you know what is the inevitable reality?
4.
thamud and aad denied the striking calamity [i.e., the 
resurrection].
5.
so as for thamud, they were destroyed by the overpowering 
[blast].
6.
and as for aad, they were destroyed by a screaming,1611 violent
wind
7.
which he [i.e., allah] imposed upon them for seven nights 
and eight days in succession, so you would see the people 
therein fallen as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees.
8.
then do you see of them any remains?
9.
and there came pharaoh and those before him and the overturned
cities1612 with sin.
10.
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord, so he seized 
them with a seizure exceeding [in severity].
11.
indeed, when the water overflowed, we carried you [i.e., your 
ancestors] in the sailing ship1613
12.
that we might make it for you a reminder and [that] a 
conscious ear would be conscious of it.
13.
then when the horn is blown with one blast
                                               
1610al-haqqah:  the inevitable reality or that which manifests realities –
another name for the resurrection.
1611or "cold."
1612those to which lot was sent (see 11:82-83) or generally, all cities which
were destroyed due to their denial of a messenger from allah.
1613which was constructed by noah.

surah 69 – al-haqqah
juz 29
587
14.
and the earth and the mountains are lifted and leveled with 
one blow [i.e., stroke] –
15.
then on that day, the occurrence [i.e., resurrection] will occur,
16.
and the heaven will split [open], for that day it is infirm.1614
17.
and the angels are at its edges.  and there will bear the throne 
of your lord above them, that day, eight [of them].
18.
that day, you will be exhibited [for judgement]; not hidden 
among you is anything concealed.1615
19.
so as for he who is given his record in his right hand, he will 
say, "here, read my record!
20.
indeed, i was certain that i would be meeting my account."
21.
so he will be in a pleasant life –
22.
in an elevated garden,
23.
its [fruit] to be picked hanging near.
24.
[they will be told], "eat and drink in satisfaction for what you 
put forth1616 in the days past."
25.
but as for he who is given his record in his left hand, he will 
say, "oh, i wish i had not been given my record
26.
and had not known what is my account.
27.
i wish it [i.e., my death] had been the decisive one.1617
28.
my wealth has not availed me.
29.
gone from me is my authority."
30.
[allah will say], "seize him and shackle him.
31.
then into hellfire drive him.
32.
then into a chain whose length is seventy cubits insert him."
                                               
1614i.e., weak, enfeebled and unstable.
1615i.e., any person or any secret you might attempt to conceal.
1616literally, "advanced" in anticipation of reward in the hereafter.
1617i.e., ending life rather than being the gateway to eternal life.

surah 69 – al-haqqah
juz 29
588
33.
indeed, he did not used to believe in allah, the most great,
34.
nor did he encourage the feeding of the poor.
35.
so there is not for him here this day any devoted friend
36.
nor any food except from the discharge of wounds;
37.
none will eat it except the sinners.
38.
so i swear by what you see
39.
and what you do not see
40.
[that] indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is the word of a noble 
messenger.
41.
and it is not the word of a poet; little do you believe.
42.
nor the word of a soothsayer; little do you remember.
43.
[it is] a revelation from the lord of the worlds.
44.
and if he [i.e., muhammad] had made up about us some [false]
sayings,
45.
we would have seized him by the right hand;1618
46.
then we would have cut from him the aorta.1619
47.
and there is no one of you who could prevent [us] from him.
48.
and indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is a reminder for the righteous.
49.
and indeed, we know that among you are deniers.
50.
and indeed, it will be [a cause of] regret upon the disbelievers.
51.
and indeed, it is the truth of certainty.
52.
so exalt the name of your lord, the most great.
                                               
1618another interpretation is "by [our] right hand," i.e., allah would have 
exacted revenge with might and power.
1619causing immediate death.

surah 70 – al-maarij
juz 29
589
surah al-maarij
1620
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
a supplicant asked for a punishment bound to happen1621
2.
to the disbelievers; of it there is no preventer.
3.
[it is] from allah, owner of the ways of ascent.
4.
the angels and the spirit [i.e., gabriel] will ascend to him 
during a day the extent of which is fifty thousand years.
5.
so be patient with gracious patience.
6.
indeed, they see it [as] distant,
7.
but we see it [as] near.
8.
on the day the sky will be like murky oil,1622
9.
and the mountains will be like wool,1623
10.
and no friend will ask [anything of] a friend,
11.
they will be shown each other.  the criminal will wish that he 
could be ransomed from the punishment of that day by his 
children
12.
and his wife and his brother
13.
and his nearest kindred who shelter him
14.
and whoever is on earth entirely [so] then it could save him.
15.
no!1624  indeed, it is the flame [of hell],
16.
a remover of exteriors.1625
                                               
1620al-maarij:  ways of ascent, i.e., those of the angels into the heavens.
1621in the hereafter.  disbelievers had challenged the prophet () by 
invoking allah to bring on his punishment.  see 8:32.
1622or "molten metal."
1623i.e., in the process of disintegration.
1624an emphatic refusal meaning "it is not to be."
1625this refers to the skin of the head or of the body or to the body extremities –
which will be burned away.

surah 70 – al-maarij
juz 29
590
17.
it invites he who turned his back [on truth] and went away 
[from obedience]
18.
and collected [wealth] and hoarded.
19.
indeed, mankind was created anxious:
20.
when evil touches him, impatient,
21.
and when good touches him, withholding [of it],
22.
except the observers of prayer –
23.
those who are constant in their prayer
24.
and those within whose wealth is a known right1626
25.
for the petitioner and the deprived –
26.
and those who believe in the day of recompense
27.
and those who are fearful of the punishment of their lord –
28.
indeed, the punishment of their lord is not that from which 
one is safe –
29.
and those who guard their private parts
30.
except from their wives or those their right hands possess,1627
for indeed, they are not to be blamed –
31.
but whoever seeks beyond that, then they are the transgressors –
32.
and those who are to their trusts and promises attentive
33.
and those who are in their testimonies upright
34.
and those who [carefully] maintain their prayer:
35.
they will be in gardens,1628 honored.
36.
so what is [the matter] with those who disbelieve, hastening 
[from] before you, [o muhammad],
37.
[to sit] on [your] right and [your] left in separate groups?1629
                                               
1626i.e., a specified share, meaning the obligatory zakah.
1627i.e., female slaves.
1628in paradise.
1629they sat at a distance in order to oppose and mock the prophet (), 
claiming that they would enter paradise before the believers.

surah 70 – al-maarij
juz 29
591
38.
does every person among them aspire to enter a garden of 
pleasure?
39.
no!  indeed, we have created them from that which they 
know.1630
40.
so i swear by the lord of [all] risings and settings1631 that 
indeed we are able
41.
to replace them with better than them; and we are not to be 
outdone.
42.
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until 
they meet their day which they are promised –
43.
the day they will emerge from the graves rapidly as if they 
were, toward an erected idol, hastening.1632
44.
their eyes humbled, humiliation will cover them.  that is the 
day which they had been promised.
                                               
1630i.e., a liquid disdained.  so how can they expect to enter paradise except 
by the will of their creator?
1631i.e., allah (subhanahu wa taala), who determines the point at which the 
sun, moon and stars rise and set according to season and every position 
of observation.
1632i.e., just as they used to race, whenever an idol was newly appointed, to 
be the first of its worshippers.


juz 29
592

1633
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
indeed, we sent noah to his people, [saying], "warn your 
people before there comes to them a painful punishment."
2.
he said, "o my people, indeed i am to you a clear warner,
3.
[saying], 'worship allah, fear him and obey me.
4.
he [i.e., allah] will forgive you of your sins and delay you for 
a specified term.  indeed, the time [set by] allah, when it comes,
will not be delayed, if you only knew.'"
5.
he said, "my lord, indeed i invited my people [to truth] night 
and day.
6.
but my invitation increased them not except in flight [i.e., 
aversion].
7.
and indeed, every time i invited them that you may forgive 
them, they put their fingers in their ears, covered themselves 
with their garments,1634 persisted, and were arrogant with 
[great] arrogance.
8.
then i invited them publicly.
9.
then i announced to them and [also] confided to them secretly
10.
and said, 'ask forgiveness of your lord.  indeed, he is ever a 
perpetual forgiver.
11.
he will send [rain from] the sky upon you in [continuing] 
showers
12.
and give you increase in wealth and children and provide for 
you gardens and provide for you rivers.
13.
what is [the matter] with you that you do not attribute to allah
[due] grandeur
                                               
1633nuh:  (the prophet) noah.
1634refusing to look or listen.


juz 29
593
14.
while he has created you in stages?1635
15.
do you not consider how allah has created seven heavens in 
layers1636
16.
and made the moon therein a [reflected] light and made the 
sun a burning lamp?
17.
and allah has caused you to grow from the earth a 
[progressive] growth.
18.
then he will return you into it and extract you [another] 
extraction.
19.
and allah has made for you the earth an expanse
20.
that you may follow therein roads of passage.'"
21.
noah said, "my lord, indeed they have disobeyed me and 
followed him whose wealth and children will not increase him 
except in loss.
22.
and they conspired an immense conspiracy
23.
and said, 'never leave your gods and never leave wadd or 
suwa or yaghuth and yauq and nasr.'1637
24.
and already they have misled many.  and, [my lord], do not 
increase the wrongdoers except in error."
25.
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire, 
and they found not for themselves besides allah [any] helpers.
26.
and noah said, "my lord, do not leave upon the earth from 
among the disbelievers an inhabitant.
27.
indeed, if you leave them, they will mislead your servants and
not beget except [every] wicked one and [confirmed] disbeliever.
28.
my lord, forgive me and my parents and whoever enters my 
house a believer and the believing men and believing women.  
and do not increase the wrongdoers except in destruction."
                                               
1635i.e., in various progressive states and conditions.  see 22:5 and 23:12-14.
1636see footnote to 67:3.
1637these were the names of specific idols named after pious men of earlier 
generations.


juz 29
594

1638
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
say, [o muhammad], "it has been revealed to me that a group 
of the jinn listened and said, 'indeed, we have heard an amazing
quran [i.e., recitation].
2.
it guides to the right course, and we have believed in it.  and 
we will never associate with our lord anyone.
3.
and [it teaches] that exalted is the nobleness of our lord; he 
has not taken a wife or a son
4.
and that our foolish one [i.e., iblees]1639 has been saying 
about allah an excessive transgression.
5.
and we had thought that mankind and the jinn would never 
speak about allah a lie.
6.
and there were men from mankind who sought refuge in men 
from the jinn, so they [only] increased them in burden [i.e., sin].
7.
and they had thought, as you thought, that allah would never 
send anyone [as a messenger].
8.
and we have sought [to reach] the heaven but found it filled 
with powerful guards and burning flames.
9.
and we used to sit therein in positions for hearing,1640 but 
whoever listens now will find a burning flame lying in wait 
for him.
10.
and we do not know [therefore] whether evil is intended for 
those on earth or whether their lord intends for them a right 
course.
                                               
1638al-jinn:  the jinn, a species of beings created by allah from fire.
1639a plural form may also be understood, i.e., "the foolish ones among us."
1640before the prophethood of muhammad () the jinn used to collect 
information by eavesdropping on the angels and then pass it on to 
fortunetellers and soothsayers.


juz 29
595
11.
and among us are the righteous, and among us are [others] 
not so; we were [of] divided ways.1641
12.
and we have become certain that we will never cause failure 
to allah upon earth, nor can we escape him by flight.
13.
and when we heard the guidance [i.e., the quran], we believed
in it.  and whoever believes in his lord will not fear deprivation
or burden.1642
14.
and among us are muslims [in submission to allah], and among
us are the unjust.1643  and whoever has become muslim –
those have sought out the right course.
15.
but as for the unjust, they will be, for hell, firewood.'
16.
and [allah revealed] that if they had remained straight on the
way, we would have given them abundant rain [i.e., provision]
17.
so we might test them therein.  and whoever turns away 
from the remembrance of his lord1644 he will put into arduous 
punishment.
18.
and [he revealed] that the masjids1645 are for allah, so do not 
invoke with allah anyone.
19.
and that when the servant [i.e., prophet] of allah stood up 
supplicating him, they almost became about him a compacted 
mass."1646
20.
say, [o muhammad], "i only invoke my lord and do not 
associate with him anyone."
                                               
1641in opinion, belief and religious practice.
1642in regard to his account in the hereafter.  nothing of his good will be 
diminished, nor will the evil of another be placed upon him.
1643i.e., those who deviate from the truth and act tyrannically.
1644i.e., refuses obedience to him.
1645the term "masjid " here includes every place of worship or the earth in 
general.
1646crowding on top of each other in the manner of locusts in order to hear 
him ().  "they" may refer to the jinn or to the disbelievers among the 
arabs.


juz 29
596
21.
say, "indeed, i do not possess for you [the power of] harm or 
right direction."
22.
say, "indeed, there will never protect me from allah anyone 
[if i should disobey], nor will i find in other than him a refuge.
23.
but [i have for you] only notification from allah, and his 
messages."  and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger –
then indeed, for him is the fire of hell; they will abide therein 
forever.
24.
[the disbelievers continue] until, when they see that which they 
are promised, then they will know who is weaker in helpers and 
less in number.
25.
say, "i do not know if what you are promised is near or if my 
lord will grant for it a [long] period."
26.
[he is] knower of the unseen, and he does not disclose his 
[knowledge of the] unseen to anyone
27.
except whom he has approved of messengers, and indeed, he 
sends before him [i.e., each messenger] and behind him 
observers1647
28.
that he [i.e., muhammad ()] may know1648 that they have 
conveyed the messages of their lord; and he has encompassed
whatever is with them and has enumerated all things in number.
                                               
1647guardian angels to protect the messenger and the message.
1648this phrase may also be read:  "so he [i.e., allah] may make evident."

surah 73 – al-muzzammil
juz 29
597
surah al-muzzammil
1649
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
o you who wraps himself [in clothing],1650
2.
arise [to pray] the night, except for a little –
3.
half of it – or subtract from it a little
4.
or add to it, and recite the quran with measured recitation.
5.
indeed, we will cast upon you a heavy word.1651
6.
indeed, the hours of the night are more effective for concurrence
[of heart and tongue]1652 and more suitable for words.1653
7.
indeed, for you by day is prolonged occupation.
8.
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to 
him with [complete] devotion.
9.
[he is] the lord of the east and the west; there is no deity 
except him, so take him as disposer of [your] affairs.1654
10.
and be patient over what they say and avoid them with gracious
avoidance.
11.
and leave me with [the matter of] the deniers, those of ease 
[in life], and allow them respite a little.
12.
indeed, with us [for them] are shackles and burning fire
13.
and food that chokes and a painful punishment –
                                               
1649al-muzzammil:  the one who wraps himself (in clothing).
1650allah (subhanahu wa taala) addresses the prophet (), who was asleep,
wrapped in his garments.
1651i.e., the revelation, which when descending on the prophet () bore 
down upon him with a great weight.  another meaning is "important 
ordinances."
1652another accepted interpretation of the same words is "indeed, arising at 
night is more difficult...," meaning that it will only be done by sincere 
believers and not others.
1653i.e., for recitation of the quran and for hearing and understanding it.
1654i.e., trust in allah and rely upon him.

surah 73 – al-muzzammil
juz 29
598
14.
on the day the earth and the mountains will convulse and the 
mountains will become a heap of sand pouring down.
15.
indeed, we have sent to you a messenger as a witness upon 
you just as we sent to pharaoh a messenger.
16.
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so we seized him with 
a ruinous seizure.
17.
then how can you fear, if you disbelieve, a day that will make
the children white-haired?1655
18.
the heaven will break apart therefrom;1656 ever is his promise 
fulfilled.
19.
indeed, this is a reminder, so whoever wills may take to his 
lord a way.
20.
indeed, your lord knows, [o muhammad], that you stand [in 
prayer] almost two thirds of the night or half of it or a third of it,
and [so do] a group of those with you.  and allah determines 
[the extent of] the night and the day.  he has known that you 
[muslims] will not be able to do it1657 and has turned to you in 
forgiveness, so recite what is easy [for you] of the quran.  he 
has known that there will be among you those who are ill and 
others traveling throughout the land seeking [something] of 
the bounty of allah and others fighting for the cause of allah.  
so recite what is easy from it and establish prayer and give 
zakah and loan allah a goodly loan.1658  and whatever good 
you put forward for yourselves – you will find it with allah.  
it is better and greater in reward.  and seek forgiveness of 
allah.  indeed, allah is forgiving and merciful.
                                               
1655another meaning is "how can you avoid [punishment]" on such a day?
1656from the terror of that day.
1657allah has known that if they were to continue in such long periods of 
worship each night, the people would be caused much hardship.
1658in the form of charities and contributions to his cause.

surah 74 – al-muddaththir
juz 29
599
surah al-muddaththir
1659
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
o you who covers himself [with a garment],1660
2.
arise and warn
3.
and your lord glorify
4.
and your clothing purify
5.
and uncleanliness1661 avoid
6.
and do not confer favor to acquire more1662
7.
but for your lord be patient.
8.
and when the trumpet is blown,
9.
that day will be a difficult day
10.
for the disbelievers – not easy.
11.
leave me with the one i created alone1663
12.
and to whom i granted extensive wealth
13.
and children present [with him]
14.
and spread [everything] before him, easing [his life].
15.
then he desires that i should add more.
16.
no!  indeed, he has been toward our verses obstinate.
17.
i will cover him with arduous torment.
18.
indeed, he thought and deliberated.1664
                                               
1659al-muddaththir:  the one who covers himself (with a garment).
1660referring to the prophet ().
1661specifically, idols or generally, bad conduct and morals.
1662an alternative meaning is "do not consider any favor you have conferred
to be great."
1663i.e., without wealth or children.  the reference is to al-waleed bin 
al-mugheerah, who after inclining toward the quran, denied it publicly 
in order to win the approval of the quraysh.
1664about what he would say concerning the quran and how he might 
discredit the prophet ().

surah 74 – al-muddaththir
juz 29
600
19.
so may he be destroyed [for] how he deliberated.
20.
then may he be destroyed [for] how he deliberated.
21.
then he considered [again];
22.
then he frowned and scowled;
23.
then he turned back and was arrogant
24.
and said, "this is not but magic imitated [from others].
25.
this is not but the word of a human being."
26.
i will drive him into saqar.1665
27.
and what can make you know what is saqar?
28.
it lets nothing remain and leaves nothing [unburned],
29.
altering [i.e., blackening] the skins.
30.
over it are nineteen [angels].
31.
and we have not made the keepers of the fire except angels.  
and we have not made their number except as a trial for those 
who disbelieve – that those who were given the scripture will
be convinced and those who have believed will increase in 
faith and those who were given the scripture and the believers 
will not doubt and that those in whose hearts is disease [i.e., 
hypocrisy] and the disbelievers will say, "what does allah 
intend by this as an example?"  thus does allah leave astray 
whom he wills and guides whom he wills.  and none knows 
the soldiers of your lord except him.  and it [i.e., mention of 
the fire] is not but a reminder to humanity.
32.
no!  by the moon
33.
and [by] the night when it departs
34.
and [by] the morning when it brightens,
35.
indeed, it [i.e., the fire] is of the greatest [afflictions]
36.
as a warning to humanity –
                                               
1665one of the proper names of hell.

surah 74 – al-muddaththir
juz 29
601
37.
to whoever wills among you to proceed1666 or stay behind.
38.
every soul, for what it has earned, will be retained1667
39.
except the companions of the right,1668
40.
[who will be] in gardens, questioning each other
41.
about the criminals,
42.
[and asking them], "what put you into saqar?"
43.
they will say, "we were not of those who prayed,
44.
nor did we used to feed the poor.
45.
and we used to enter into vain discourse with those who 
engaged [in it],
46.
and we used to deny the day of recompense
47.
until there came to us the certainty [i.e., death]."
48.
so there will not benefit them the intercession of [any] 
intercessors.
49.
then what is [the matter] with them that they are, from the 
reminder, turning away
50.
as if they were alarmed donkeys
51.
fleeing from a lion?
52.
rather, every person among them desires that he1669 would be 
given scriptures spread about.1670
53.
no!  but they do not fear the hereafter.
54.
no!  indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is a reminder
55.
then whoever wills will remember it.
56.
and they will not remember except that allah wills.  he is 
worthy of fear and adequate for [granting] forgiveness.
                                               
1666to righteousness by acceptance of the warning.
1667i.e., subject or held responsible.
1668i.e., the righteous who receive their records in their right hands.
1669instead of muhammad ().
1670i.e., made public.  much of their refusal of his message was due to envy 
and jealousy of the prophet ().

surah 75 – al-qiyamah
juz 29
602
surah al-qiyamah
1671
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
i swear by the day of resurrection
2.
and i swear by the reproaching soul1672 [to the certainty of 
resurrection].
3.
does man think that we will not assemble his bones?
4.
yes.  [we are] able [even] to proportion his fingertips.
5.
but man desires to continue in sin.1673
6.
he asks, "when is the day of resurrection?"
7.
so when vision is dazzled
8.
and the moon darkens
9.
and the sun and the moon are joined,
10.
man will say on that day, "where is the [place of] escape?"
11.
no!  there is no refuge.
12.
to your lord, that day, is the [place of] permanence.
13.
man will be informed that day of what he sent ahead1674 and 
kept back.1675
14.
rather, man, against himself, will be a witness,1676
15.
even if he presents his excuses.
16.
move not your tongue with it, [o muhammad], to hasten with 
it [i.e., recitation of the quran].
                                               
1671al-qiyamah:  the resurrection.
1672i.e., that of the believer, which blames him when he falls into sin or error.
1673literally, "to sin ahead of him."  this refers to the disbeliever, who 
denies the day of account.
1674i.e., his deeds, which await him in the hereafter.
1675i.e., that which he did not do or which he delayed.
1676as described in 36:65 and 41:20-23.

surah 75 – al-qiyamah
juz 29
603
17.
indeed, upon us is its collection [in your heart] and [to make 
possible] its recitation.
18.
so when we have recited it [through gabriel], then follow its 
recitation.
19.
then upon us is its clarification [to you].
20.
no!  but you [i.e., mankind] love the immediate
21.
and leave [i.e., neglect] the hereafter.
22.
[some] faces, that day, will be radiant,
23.
looking at their lord.1677
24.
and [some] faces, that day, will be contorted,
25.
expecting that there will be done to them [something] backbreaking.
26.
no!  when it [i.e., the soul] has reached the collar bones1678
27.
and it is said, "who will cure [him]?"
28.
and he [i.e., the dying one] is certain that it is the [time of] 
separation
29.
and the leg is wound about the leg,1679
30.
to your lord, that day, will be the procession.1680
31.
and he [i.e., the disbeliever] had not believed, nor had he prayed.
32.
but [instead], he denied and turned away.
33.
and then he went to his people, swaggering [in pride].
34.
woe to you, and woe!
35.
then woe to you, and woe!
36.
does man think that he will be left neglected?1681
                                               
1677the people of paradise will actually see their creator in the hereafter.
1678at the time it is about to leave the body when one is on the verge of death.
1679from the difficulties the person faces at death or his sudden awareness 
of the realities of both this world and the hereafter.  it may also refer to 
his shrouding after death.
1680literally, "driving" or "herding" or "the place to which one is driven."
1681i.e., to no end, without responsibility, or without being returned to the 
creator for judgement.

surah 75 – al-qiyamah
juz 29
604
37.
had he not been a sperm from semen emitted?
38.
then he was a clinging clot, and [allah] created [his form] 
and proportioned [him]
39.
and made of him two mates, the male and the female.
40.
is not that [creator] able to give life to the dead?


juz 29
605

1682
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
has there [not] come upon man a period of time when he was 
not a thing [even] mentioned?
2.
indeed, we created man from a sperm-drop mixture1683 that 
we may try him; and we made him hearing and seeing.
3.
indeed, we guided him to the way, be he grateful or be he 
ungrateful.
4.
indeed, we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and 
shackles and a blaze.
5.
indeed, the righteous will drink from a cup [of wine] whose 
mixture is of kafur,1684
6.
a spring of which the [righteous] servants of allah will drink; 
they will make it gush forth in force [and abundance].
7.
they [are those who] fulfill [their] vows and fear a day whose 
evil will be widespread.
8.
and they give food in spite of love for it1685 to the needy, the 
orphan, and the captive,
9.
[saying], "we feed you only for the countenance [i.e., approval]
of allah.  we wish not from you reward or gratitude.
10.
indeed, we fear from our lord a day austere and distressful."
11.
so allah will protect them from the evil of that day and give 
them radiance and happiness
12.
and will reward them for what they patiently endured [with] a 
garden [in paradise] and silk [garments].
                                               
1682al-insan:  man.  also entitled surah ad-dahr (time).
1683i.e., a combination of the male and female substance, within the womb.
1684a sweet-smelling spring in paradise.
1685the meaning here may also be "out of love for him," i.e., allah 
(subhanahu wa taala).


juz 29
606
13.
[they will be] reclining therein on adorned couches.  they 
will not see therein any [burning] sun or [freezing] cold.
14.
and near above them are its shades, and its [fruit] to be picked 
will be lowered in compliance.
15.
and there will be circulated among them vessels of silver and 
cups having been [created] clear [as glass],
16.
clear glasses [made] from silver of which they have determined
the measure.
17.
and they will be given to drink a cup [of wine] whose mixture 
is of ginger
18.
[from] a fountain within it [i.e., paradise] named salsabeel.
19.
there will circulate among them young boys made eternal.  
when you see them, you would think them [as beautiful as] 
scattered pearls.
20.
and when you look there [in paradise], you will see pleasure 
and great dominion.
21.
upon them [i.e., the inhabitants] will be green garments of fine 
silk and brocade.  and they will be adorned with bracelets of 
silver, and their lord will give them a purifying drink.
22.
[and it will be said], "indeed, this is for you a reward, and 
your effort has been appreciated."
23.
indeed, it is we who have sent down to you, [o muhammad], 
the quran progressively.
24.
so be patient for the decision of your lord and do not obey 
from among them a sinner or ungrateful [disbeliever].
25.
and mention the name of your lord [in prayer] morning and 
evening
26.
and during the night prostrate to him and exalt [i.e., praise] 
him a long [part of the] night.
27.
indeed, these [disbelievers] love the immediate and leave 
behind them1686 a grave day.
                                               
1686i.e., neglect.  the meaning may also be "leave ahead of them."


juz 29
607
28.
we have created them and strengthened their forms, and when we
will, we can change their likenesses with [complete] alteration.
29.
indeed, this is a reminder, so he who wills may take to his 
lord a way.
30.
and you do not will except that allah wills.  indeed, allah is 
ever knowing and wise.
31.
he admits whom he wills into his mercy; but the wrongdoers –
he has prepared for them a painful punishment.

surah 77 – al-mursalah
juz 29
608
surah al-mursalah
1687
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by those [winds] sent forth in gusts
2.
and the winds that blow violently
3.
and [by] the winds that spread [clouds]
4.
and those [angels] who bring criterion1688
5.
and those [angels] who deliver a message
6.
as justification or warning,
7.
indeed, what you are promised is to occur.
8.
so when the stars are obliterated
9.
and when the heaven is opened
10.
and when the mountains are blown away
11.
and when the messengers' time has come...1689
12.
for what day was it postponed?1690
13.
for the day of judgement.
14.
and what can make you know what is the day of judgement?
15.
woe,1691 that day, to the deniers.
16.
did we not destroy the former peoples?
17.
then we will follow them with the later ones.
18.
thus do we deal with the criminals.
                                               
1687al-mursalah:  those sent forth.
1688to allah's human messengers.
1689i.e., when they are gathered to witness concerning their nations.  the 
sentence's conclusion is understood to be "...the promised judgement 
will then take place."
1690"it" may refer to either the aforementioned occurrences collectively or
to the testimony of the messengers.
1691i.e., death and destruction.

surah 77 – al-mursalah
juz 29
609
19.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
20.
did we not create you from a liquid disdained?
21.
and we placed it in a firm lodging [i.e., the womb]
22.
for a known extent.
23.
and we determined [it], and excellent [are we] to determine.
24.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
25.
have we not made the earth a container
26.
of the living and the dead?
27.
and we placed therein lofty, firmly set mountains and have 
given you to drink sweet water.
28.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
29.
[they will be told], "proceed to that which you used to deny.
30.
proceed to a shadow [of smoke] having three columns
31.
[but having] no cool shade and availing not against the flame."
32.
indeed, it throws sparks [as huge] as a fortress,
33.
as if they were yellowish [black] camels.
34.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
35.
this is a day they will not speak,
36.
nor will it be permitted for them to make an excuse.
37.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
38.
this is the day of judgement; we will have assembled you 
and the former peoples.
39.
so if you have a plan, then plan against me.
40.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
41.
indeed, the righteous will be among shades and springs
42.
and fruits from whatever they desire,
43.
[being told], "eat and drink in satisfaction for what you used 
to do."
44.
indeed, we thus reward the doers of good.

surah 77 – al-mursalah
juz 29
610
45.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
46.
[o disbelievers], eat and enjoy yourselves a little; indeed, you 
are criminals.
47.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
48.
and when it is said to them, "bow [in prayer]," they do not bow.
49.
woe, that day, to the deniers.
50.
then in what statement after it [i.e., the quran] will they believe?

surah 78 – an-naba
juz 30
611
surah an-naba
1692
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
about what are they asking one another?
2.
about the great news1693 –
3.
that over which they are in disagreement.
4.
no!  they are going to know.
5.
then, no!  they are going to know.
6.
have we not made the earth a resting place?
7.
and the mountains as stakes?1694
8.
and we created you in pairs
9.
and made your sleep [a means for] rest
10.
and made the night as clothing1695
11.
and made the day for livelihood
12.
and constructed above you seven strong [heavens]
13.
and made [therein] a burning lamp
14.
and sent down, from the rain clouds, pouring water
15.
that we may bring forth thereby grain and vegetation
16.
and gardens of entwined growth.
17.
indeed, the day of judgement is an appointed time –
18.
the day the horn is blown and you will come forth in multitudes
19.
and the heaven is opened and will become gateways
20.
and the mountains are removed and will be [but] a mirage.
21.
indeed, hell has been lying in wait
                                               
1692an-naba:  the news (or happening).
1693i.e., the resurrection.
1694to stabilize the land and balance the earth.
1695covering and concealing you in its darkness.

surah 78 – an-naba
juz 30
612
22.
for the transgressors, a place of return,
23.
in which they will remain for ages [unending].
24.
they will not taste therein [any] coolness or drink
25.
except scalding water and [foul] purulence –
26.
an appropriate recompense.1696
27.
indeed, they were not expecting an account
28.
and denied our verses with [emphatic] denial.
29.
but all things we have enumerated in writing.
30.
"so taste [the penalty], and never will we increase you except 
in torment."1697
31.
indeed, for the righteous is attainment1698 –
32.
gardens and grapevines
33.
and full-breasted [companions] of equal age
34.
and a full cup.1699
35.
no ill speech will they hear therein or any falsehood –
36.
[as] reward from your lord, [a generous] gift [made due by] 
account,1700
37.
[from] the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is 
between them, the most merciful.  they possess not from him
[authority for] speech.1701
38.
the day that the spirit [i.e., gabriel] and the angels will stand 
in rows, they will not speak except for one whom the most 
merciful permits, and he will say what is correct.
                                               
1696in proportion to and comparable with their crimes.
1697this announcement will be made to the companions of hell.
1698of security, success and reward, including escape and safety from hell.
1699of wine which is delicious and does not intoxicate.
1700i.e., as a result of both their own righteous deeds and the limitless 
generosity of allah (subhanahu wa taala).  another meaning is "a gift 
calculated [to be adequate]."
1701none of allah's creatures can plead with him on the day of judgement 
except by his permission.

surah 78 – an-naba
juz 30
613
39.
that is the true [i.e., certain] day; so he who wills may take 
to his lord a [way of] return.1702
40.
indeed, we have warned you of a near punishment on the day 
when a man will observe what his hands have put forth1703 and 
the disbeliever will say, "oh, i wish that i were dust!"
                                               
1702i.e., a direct route through correct beliefs and righteous deeds.
1703i.e., the deeds he did in this world, which await him in the hereafter.

surah 79 – an-naziat
juz 30
614
surah an-naziat
1704
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by those [angels] who extract with violence1705
2.
and [by] those who remove with ease1706
3.
and [by] those who glide [as if] swimming1707
4.
and those who race each other in a race1708
5.
and those who arrange [each] matter,1709
6.
on the day the blast [of the horn] will convulse [creation],
7.
there will follow it the subsequent [one].
8.
hearts,1710 that day, will tremble,
9.
their eyes1711 humbled.
10.
they are [presently] saying, "will we indeed be returned to 
[our] former state [of life]?
11.
even if we should be decayed bones?"1712
12.
they say, "that, then, would be a losing return."1713
13.
indeed, it will be but one shout,
14.
and suddenly they will be [alert] upon the earth's surface.
15.
has there reached you the story of moses? –
16.
when his lord called to him in the sacred valley of tuwa,
                                               
1704an-naziat:  the extractors.
1705i.e., those who tear out the souls of those destined for hell.
1706i.e., those angels who ease out the souls of those destined for paradise.
1707speeding to execute allah's commands.
1708racing to deliver the souls of the believers to paradise.
1709according to allah's decree.
1710those of the disbelievers who denied the resurrection.
1711those of the disbelievers.
1712the disbelievers say this in ridicule of the warning.
1713i.e., "if that were so, we would not be able to escape punishment."

surah 79 – an-naziat
juz 30
615
17.
"go to pharaoh.  indeed, he has transgressed.
18.
and say to him, 'would you [be willing to] purify yourself
19.
and let me guide you to your lord so you would fear [him]?'"
20.
and he showed him the greatest sign,1714
21.
but he [i.e., pharaoh] denied and disobeyed.
22.
then he turned his back, striving [i.e., plotting].1715
23.
and he gathered [his people] and called out
24.
and said, "i am your most exalted lord."
25.
so allah seized him in exemplary punishment for the last and 
the first [transgression].1716
26.
indeed in that is a lesson [i.e., warning] for whoever would 
fear [allah].
27.
are you a more difficult creation or is the heaven?  he [i.e., 
allah] constructed it.
28.
he raised its ceiling and proportioned it.
29.
and he darkened its night and extracted its brightness.1717
30.
and after that he spread the earth.
31.
he extracted from it its water and its pasture,
32.
and the mountains he set firmly
33.
as enjoyment [i.e., provision] for you and your grazing livestock.
34.
but when there comes the greatest overwhelming calamity1718 –
35.
the day when man will remember that for which he strove,
36.
and hellfire will be exposed for [all] those who see –
                                               
1714i.e., the miracle of his staff becoming a great snake.
1715an alternative meaning is "running [from the snake]."
1716i.e., for pharaoh's setting himself up as a deity and for his previous oppression
of the people and denial of moses.
1717i.e., created the day from within the surrounding darkness.
1718i.e., the day of resurrection.

surah 79 – an-naziat
juz 30
616
37.
so as for he who transgressed
38.
and preferred the life of the world,
39.
then indeed, hellfire will be [his] refuge.
40.
but as for he who feared the position of his lord1719 and 
prevented the soul from [unlawful] inclination,
41.
then indeed, paradise will be [his] refuge.
42.
they ask you, [o muhammad], about the hour:  when is its 
arrival?1720
43.
in what [position] are you that you should mention it?1721
44.
to your lord is its finality.1722
45.
you are only a warner for those who fear it.
46.
it will be, on the day they see it,1723 as though they had not 
remained [in the world] except for an afternoon or a morning 
thereof.
                                               
1719see footnote to 55:46.
1720literally, "resting" or "establishment."
1721meaning that muhammad () had no knowledge of it, so how could he 
inform them?
1722i.e., its destination and termination.  and to him belongs ultimate knowledge
of it.
1723i.e., the hour, the resurrection.

surah 80 – abasa
juz 30
617
surah abasa
1724
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
he [i.e., the prophet ()] frowned and turned away
2.
because there came to him the blind man,1725 [interrupting].
3.
but what would make you perceive, [o muhammad], that 
perhaps he might be purified1726
4.
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him?
5.
as for he who thinks himself without need,1727
6.
to him you give attention.
7.
and not upon you [is any blame] if he will not be purified.1728
8.
but as for he who came to you striving [for knowledge]
9.
while he fears [allah],
10.
from him you are distracted.
11.
no!  indeed, they [i.e., these verses] are a reminder;
12.
so whoever wills may remember it.1729
13.
[it is recorded] in honored sheets,
14.
exalted and purified,
15.
[carried] by the hands of messenger-angels,
16.
noble and dutiful.
17.
destroyed [i.e., cursed] is man;1730 how disbelieving is he.
                                               
1724abasa:  he frowned.
1725abdullah, the son of umm maktum.
1726as a result of what he learns from you.
1727i.e., without need of faith or need of allah (subhanahu wa taala).  here 
it is in reference to a certain influential member of the quraysh whom 
the prophet () had hoped to bring to islam.
1728the prophet () was responsible only for conveying the message, not 
for ultimate guidance.
1729the revelation.  or "him," i.e., allah (subhanahu wa taala).
1730i.e., those who deny allah's message.

surah 80 – abasa
juz 30
618
18.
from what thing [i.e., substance] did he create him?
19.
from a sperm-drop he created him and destined for him;1731
20.
then he eased the way for him;1732
21.
then he causes his death and provides a grave for him.1733
22.
then when he wills, he will resurrect him.
23.
no!  he [i.e., man] has not yet accomplished what he 
commanded him.
24.
then let mankind look at his food –
25.
how we poured down water in torrents,
26.
then we broke open the earth, splitting [it with sprouts],
27.
and caused to grow within it grain
28.
and grapes and herbage
29.
and olive and palm trees
30.
and gardens of dense shrubbery
31.
and fruit and grass –
32.
[as] enjoyment [i.e., provision] for you and your grazing 
livestock.
33.
but when there comes the deafening blast1734
34.
on the day a man will flee from his brother
35.
and his mother and his father
36.
and his wife and his children,
37.
for every man, that day, will be a matter adequate for him.1735
                                               
1731his proportions, provisions, life span, etc.
1732into this world (i.e., his birth).  it may also refer to life itself, which has 
been made easier by allah's guidance.
1733to conceal his decaying body.
1734the piercing blast of the horn which signals resurrection.  a§-sakhkhah 
is also a name for the day of resurrection.
1735i.e., to occupy him.  he will be concerned only with himself, thus forgetting
all others.

surah 80 – abasa
juz 30
619
38.
[some] faces, that day, will be bright –
39.
laughing, rejoicing at good news.
40.
and [other] faces, that day, will have upon them dust.
41.
blackness will cover them.
42.
those are the disbelievers, the wicked ones.

surah 81 – at-takweer
juz 30
620
surah at-takweer
1736
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
when the sun is wrapped up [in darkness]
2.
and when the stars fall, dispersing,
3.
and when the mountains are removed
4.
and when full-term she-camels1737 are neglected
5.
and when the wild beasts are gathered
6.
and when the seas are filled with flame1738
7.
and when the souls are paired1739
8.
and when the girl [who was] buried alive is asked
9.
for what sin she was killed
10.
and when the pages1740 are spread [i.e., made public]
11.
and when the sky is stripped away
12.
and when hellfire is set ablaze
13.
and when paradise is brought near,
14.
a soul will [then] know what it has brought [with it].1741
15.
so i swear by the retreating stars –
16.
those that run [their courses] and disappear [i.e., set] –
17.
and by the night as it closes in1742
18.
and by the dawn when it breathes [i.e., stirs]
                                               
1736at-takweer:  the wrapping.
1737those ten months pregnant and nearing delivery.  this verse alludes to 
distraction from the most valued of possessions.
1738or "when the seas have overflowed [into each other]."
1739with another like soul.  it can also mean "joined" (with their groups or sects).
1740on which are recorded the deeds of all people.
1741i.e., all of one's deeds from worldly life, which have accompanied the 
soul to the hereafter.
1742an alternative meaning is "as it departs."

surah 81 – at-takweer
juz 30
621
19.
[that] indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is a word [conveyed by] a 
noble messenger [i.e., gabriel]
20.
[who is] possessed of power and with the owner of the throne,
secure [in position],
21.
obeyed there [in the heavens] and trustworthy.
22.
and your companion [i.e., prophet muhammad ()] is not [at 
all] mad.1743
23.
and he has already seen him [i.e., gabriel] in the clear 
horizon.1744
24.
and he [i.e., muhammad ()] is not a withholder of 
[knowledge of] the unseen.1745
25.
and it [i.e., the quran] is not the word of a devil, expelled 
[from the heavens].
26.
so where are you going?1746
27.
it is not except a reminder to the worlds
28.
for whoever wills among you to take a right course.
29.
and you do not will except that allah wills – lord of the worlds.
                                               
1743literally, "possessed by jinn."
1744i.e., the eastern horizon, where the sun rises.  see footnote to 53:6.
1745prophet muhammad () did not withhold that knowledge of the unseen 
which allah had revealed to him in the quran.
1746in your denial of the quran and in your accusations against the prophet ().  
the meaning is essentially "surely, you have strayed far from allah's path."

surah 82 – a1-infitar
juz 30
622
surah al-infitar
1747
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
when the sky breaks apart
2.
and when the stars fall, scattering,
3.
and when the seas are erupted
4.
and when the [contents of] graves are scattered [i.e., exposed],
5.
a soul will [then] know what it has put forth and kept back.
6.
o mankind, what has deceived you concerning your lord, the 
generous,
7.
who created you, proportioned you, and balanced you?
8.
in whatever form he willed has he assembled you.
9.
no!  but you deny the recompense.
10.
and indeed, [appointed] over you are keepers,1748
11.
noble and recording;
12.
they know whatever you do.
13.
indeed, the righteous will be in pleasure,
14.
and indeed, the wicked will be in hellfire.
15.
they will [enter to] burn therein on the day of recompense,
16.
and never therefrom will they be absent.
17.
and what can make you know what is the day of recompense?
18.
then, what can make you know what is the day of recompense?
19.
it is the day when a soul will not possess for another soul 
[power to do] a thing; and the command, that day, is [entirely]
with allah.
                                               
1747al-infitar:  the breaking apart.
1748angels who preserve the deeds of men in records.

surah 83 – a1-mutaffifeen
juz 30
623
surah al-mutaffifeen
1749
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
woe to those who give less [than due],1750
2.
who, when they take a measure from people, take in full.
3.
but if they give by measure or by weight to them, they cause loss.
4.
do they not think that they will be resurrected
5.
for a tremendous day –
6.
the day when mankind will stand before the lord of the worlds?
7.
no!  indeed, the record of the wicked is in sijjeen.
8.
and what can make you know what is sijjeen?
9.
it is [their destination1751 recorded in] a register inscribed.
10.
woe, that day, to the deniers,
11.
who deny the day of recompense.
12.
and none deny it except every sinful transgressor.
13.
when our verses are recited to him, he says, "legends of the 
former peoples."
14.
no!  rather, the stain has covered their hearts of that which 
they were earning.1752
15.
no!  indeed, from their lord, that day, they will be partitioned.1753
16.
then indeed, they will [enter and] burn in hellfire.
17.
then it will be said [to them], "this is what you used to deny."
18.
no!  indeed, the record of the righteous is in illiyyun.
                                               
1749al-mutaffifeen:  those who give less.
1750i.e., those who cheat people by giving them less than what they paid for when
weighing or measuring – an amount so little as to hardly be noticed.
1751the lowest depths of hell.
1752i.e., their sins.
1753i.e., they will not be able to see him.

surah 83 – a1-mutaffifeen
juz 30
624
19.
and what can make you know what is illiyyun?
20.
it is [their destination1754 recorded in] a register inscribed
21.
which is witnessed by those brought near [to allah].
22.
indeed, the righteous will be in pleasure
23.
on adorned couches, observing.
24.
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of pleasure.
25.
they will be given to drink [pure] wine1755 [which was] sealed.
26.
the last of it1756 is musk.  so for this let the competitors compete.
27.
and its mixture is of tasneem,1757
28.
a spring from which those near [to allah] drink.
29.
indeed, those who committed crimes used to laugh at those 
who believed.
30.
and when they passed by them, they would exchange derisive 
glances.
31.
and when they returned to their people, they would return 
jesting.
32.
and when they saw them, they would say, "indeed, those are 
truly lost."
33.
but they had not been sent as guardians over them.
34.
so today1758 those who believed are laughing at the disbelievers,
35.
on adorned couches, observing.
36.
have the disbelievers [not] been rewarded [this day] for what 
they used to do?
                                               
1754the highest elevations of paradise.
1755which is delicious and does not intoxicate.
1756i.e., its lingering odor.
1757the highest spring in paradise and the most favored drink of its inhabitants.
1758on the day of judgement.

surah 84 – a1-inshiqaq
juz 30
625
surah al-inshiqaq
1759
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
when the sky has split [open]
2.
and has listened [i.e., responded]1760 to its lord and was 
obligated [to do so]
3.
and when the earth has been extended1761
4.
and has cast out that within it1762 and relinquished [it]
5.
and has listened [i.e., responded] to its lord and was obligated
[to do so] –
6.
o mankind, indeed you are laboring toward your lord with 
[great] exertion1763 and will meet it.1764
7.
then as for he who is given his record in his right hand,
8.
he will be judged with an easy account
9.
and return to his people in happiness.
10.
but as for he who is given his record behind his back,
11.
he will cry out for destruction
12.
and [enter to] burn in a blaze.
13.
indeed, he had [once] been among his people in happiness;
14.
indeed, he had thought he would never return [to allah].
15.
but yes!  indeed, his lord was ever, of him, seeing.
                                               
1759al-inshiqaq:  the splitting.
1760it will have heard allah's command and will have inclined immediately 
to compliance and willing obedience.
1761i.e., stretched flat and spread out.
1762of the dead and all else buried therein.
1763i.e., striving throughout your life until you meet your lord, hastening 
toward death.
1764i.e., you will find all that you intended and accomplished awaiting you 
in the hereafter.  another meaning is "and will meet him [i.e., your 
lord]" and be recompensed in full by him.

surah 84 – a1-inshiqaq
juz 30
626
16.
so i swear by the twilight glow
17.
and [by] the night and what it envelops
18.
and [by] the moon when it becomes full
19.
[that] you will surely embark upon [i.e., experience] state after
state.1765
20.
so what is [the matter] with them [that] they do not believe,
21.
and when the quran is recited to them, they do not prostrate 
[to allah]?
22.
but those who have disbelieved deny,
23.
and allah is most knowing of what they keep within themselves.
24.
so give them tidings of a painful punishment,
25.
except for those who believe and do righteous deeds.  for them
is a reward uninterrupted.
                                               
1765i.e., various stages, both in this life and in the hereafter.

surah 85 – a1-buruj
juz 30
627
surah al-buruj
1766
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the sky containing great stars
2.
and [by] the promised day
3.
and [by] the witness and what is witnessed,
4.
destroyed [i.e., cursed] were the companions of the trench1767
5.
[containing] the fire full of fuel,
6.
when they were sitting near it
7.
and they, to what they were doing against the believers, were 
witnesses.1768
8.
and they resented them not except because they believed in 
allah, the exalted in might, the praiseworthy,
9.
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth.  
and allah, over all things, is witness.
10.
indeed, those who have tortured1769 the believing men and 
believing women and then have not repented will have the 
punishment of hell, and they will have the punishment of the 
burning fire.
11.
indeed, those who have believed and done righteous deeds 
will have gardens beneath which rivers flow.  that is the great 
attainment.
                                               
1766al-buruj:  the great stars.  also explained as "the planets" or their 
"high positions in the heaven."
1767or "may they be destroyed" or "cursed."  the "companions of the trench"
(or ditch) were agents of a tyrannical king who refused to allow his 
people to believe in allah.  their evil deed in obedience to their ruler 
earned for them the curse of allah (subhanahu wa taala).
1768after casting the believers into a trench filled with fire, they sat at its edge,
watching them burn to death.  this event occurred before the time of 
prophet muhammad ().
1769or, in this instance, the literal meaning of "burned" is also appropriate.

surah 85 – a1-buruj
juz 30
628
12.
indeed, the assault [i.e., vengeance] of your lord is severe.
13.
indeed, it is he who originates [creation] and repeats.
14.
and he is the forgiving, the affectionate,
15.
honorable owner of the throne,
16.
effecter of what he intends.
17.
has there reached you the story of the soldiers –
18.
[those of] pharaoh and thamud?
19.
but they who disbelieve are in [persistent] denial,
20.
while allah encompasses them from behind.1770
21.
but this is an honored quran
22.
[inscribed] in a preserved slate.
                                               
1770see footnote to 2:19.

surah 86 – at-tariq
juz 30
629
surah at-tariq
1771
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the sky and the night comer –
2.
and what can make you know what is the night comer?
3.
it is the piercing star1772 –
4.
there is no soul but that it has over it a protector.
5.
so let man observe from what he was created.
6.
he was created from a fluid, ejected,
7.
emerging from between the backbone and the ribs.
8.
indeed, he [i.e., allah], to return him [to life], is able.
9.
the day when secrets will be put on trial,1773
10.
then he [i.e., man] will have no power or any helper.
11.
by the sky which returns [rain]
12.
and [by] the earth which cracks open,1774
13.
indeed, it [i.e., the quran] is a decisive statement,
14.
and it is not amusement.
15.
indeed, they are planning a plan,
16.
but i am planning a plan.
17.
so allow time for the disbelievers.  leave them awhile.1775
                                               
1771at-tariq:  that which comes at night.
1772whose light pierces through the darkness.
1773i.e., exposed, examined and judged.
1774with the growth of plants.
1775i.e., do not be in haste for revenge, for you will see what will become of 
them.

surah 87 – al-ala
juz 30
630
surah al-ala
1776
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
exalt the name of your lord, the most high,
2.
who created and proportioned
3.
and who destined and [then] guided
4.
and who brings out the pasture
5.
and [then] makes it black stubble.
6.
we will make you recite, [o muhammad], and you will not 
forget,
7.
except what allah should will.  indeed, he knows what is 
declared and what is hidden.
8.
and we will ease you toward ease.1777
9.
so remind, if the reminder should benefit;1778
10.
he who fears [allah] will be reminded.
11.
but the wretched one will avoid it –
12.
[he] who will [enter and] burn in the greatest fire,
13.
neither dying therein nor living.
14.
he has certainly succeeded who purifies himself
15.
and mentions the name of his lord and prays.
16.
but you prefer the worldly life,
17.
while the hereafter is better and more enduring.
18.
indeed, this is in the former scriptures,
19.
the scriptures of ibrahim and moses.
                                               
1776al-ala:  the most high.
1777to the path of allah's religion, which is easy and natural, or toward paradise,
by giving opportunities for righteous deeds.
1778i.e., wherever it will be heard and understood.

surah 88 – al-ghashiyah
juz 30
631
surah al-ghashiyah
1779
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
has there reached you the report of the overwhelming [event]?
2.
[some] faces, that day, will be humbled,
3.
working [hard] and exhausted.1780
4.
they will [enter to] burn in an intensely hot fire.
5.
they will be given drink from a boiling spring.
6.
for them there will be no food except from a poisonous, thorny
plant
7.
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger.
8.
[other] faces, that day, will show pleasure.
9.
with their effort [they are] satisfied
10.
in an elevated garden,
11.
wherein they will hear no unsuitable speech.1781
12.
within it is a flowing spring.
13.
within it are couches raised high
14.
and cups put in place
15.
and cushions lined up
16.
and carpets spread around.
17.
then do they not look at the camels – how they are created?
18.
and at the sky – how it is raised?
19.
and at the mountains – how they are erected?
                                               
1779al-ghashiyah:  the overwhelming, one of the names of the resurrection.
1780another accepted meaning is "they were working hard and exhausted," 
i.e., doing deeds during worldly life which did not benefit them since 
they were not accompanied by faith or done for the acceptance of allah 
(subhanahu wa taala).
1781i.e., any insult, falsehood, immorality, idle or vain talk, etc.

surah 88 – al-ghashiyah
juz 30
632
20.
and at the earth – how it is spread out?
21.
so remind, [o muhammad]; you are only a reminder.
22.
you are not over them a controller.
23.
however, he who turns away and disbelieves –
24.
then allah will punish him with the greatest punishment.
25.
indeed, to us is their return.
26.
then indeed, upon us is their account.

surah 89 – al-fajr
juz 30
633
surah al-fajr
1782
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the dawn
2.
and [by] ten nights1783
3.
and [by] the even [number] and the odd
4.
and [by] the night when it passes,
5.
is there [not] in [all] that an oath [sufficient] for one of 
perception?1784
6.
have you not considered how your lord dealt with aad –
7.
[with] iram1785 – who had lofty pillars,1786
8.
the likes of whom had never been created in the land?
9.
and [with] thamud, who carved out the rocks in the valley?
10.
and [with] pharaoh, owner of the stakes?1787 –
11.
[all of] whom oppressed within the lands
12.
and increased therein the corruption.
13.
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment.
14.
indeed, your lord is in observation.
15.
and as for man, when his lord tries him and [thus] is generous
to him and favors him, he says, "my lord has honored me."1788
16.
but when he tries him and restricts his provision, he says, 
"my lord has humiliated me."
                                               
1782al-fajr:  the dawn.
1783usually interpreted as the first ten nights of the month of dhul-hijjah.
1784based upon the following verses, what has been sworn to by allah is 
that he will certainly punish the disbelievers.
1785another name for the first people of aad, to whom prophet hud was sent.
1786supporting their tents or buildings.
1787by which he tortured people.
1788he is proud rather than grateful, attributing the favor to his own merit.

surah 89 – al-fajr
juz 30
634
17.
no!1789  but you do not honor the orphan
18.
and you do not encourage one another to feed the poor.
19.
and you consume inheritance, devouring [it] altogether,1790
20.
and you love wealth with immense love.
21.
no!  when the earth has been leveled – pounded and crushed –
22.
and your lord has come1791 and the angels, rank upon rank,
23.
and brought [within view], that day, is hell – that day, man 
will remember, but how [i.e., what good] to him will be the 
remembrance?
24.
he will say, "oh, i wish i had sent ahead [some good] for my 
life."1792
25.
so on that day, none will punish [as severely] as his punishment,
26.
and none will bind [as severely] as his binding [of the evildoers].
27.
[to the righteous it will be said], "o reassured soul,
28.
return to your lord, well-pleased and pleasing [to him],
29.
and enter among my [righteous] servants
30.
and enter my paradise."
                                               
1789it is not like you imagine.  rather, allah tries people through prosperity 
and hardship and rewards both gratitude and patience with honor in the 
hereafter.
1790not caring whether it is lawful or unlawful.
1791to pass judgement.  see footnote to 2:19.
1792the everlasting life of the hereafter.

surah 90 – al-balad
juz 30
635
surah al-balad
1793
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
i swear by this city [i.e., makkah] –
2.
and you, [o muhammad], are free of restriction in this city –
3.
and [by] the father1794 and that which was born [of him],
4.
we have certainly created man into hardship.
5.
does he think that never will anyone overcome him?
6.
he says, "i have spent wealth in abundance."
7.
does he think that no one has seen him?
8.
have we not made for him two eyes?
9.
and a tongue and two lips?
10.
and have shown him the two ways?1795
11.
but he has not broken through the difficult pass.1796
12.
and what can make you know what is [breaking through] the 
difficult pass?
13.
it is the freeing of a slave
14.
or feeding on a day of severe hunger
15.
an orphan of near relationship
16.
or a needy person in misery
17.
and then being among those who believed and advised one 
another to patience and advised one another to compassion.
18.
those are the companions of the right.1797
                                               
1793al-balad:  the city.
1794said to be adam (upon him be peace).
1795of good and evil.
1796i.e., the steep incline or obstacle.  in other words, he has not spent in the 
cause of allah but only boasts of spending in front of others.
1797or "the companions of good fortune," i.e., those who receive their 
records in their right hands and proceed to paradise.

surah 90 – al-balad
juz 30
636
19.
but they who disbelieved in our signs – those are the companions 
of the left.1798
20.
over them will be fire closed in.1799
                                               
1798or "the companions of ill fortune," i.e., those who receive their records 
in their left hands and proceed to hell.
1799the cover over hell will be sealed and locked, containing its fire and its 
inhabitants.

surah 91 – ash-shams
juz 30
637
surah ash-shams
1800
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the sun and its brightness
2.
and [by] the moon when it follows it
3.
and [by] the day when it displays it1801
4.
and [by] the night when it covers [i.e., conceals] it
5.
and [by] the sky and he who constructed it
6.
and [by] the earth and he who spread it
7.
and [by] the soul and he who proportioned it1802
8.
and inspired it [with discernment of] its wickedness and its 
righteousness,
9.
he has succeeded who purifies it,
10.
and he has failed who instills it [with corruption].
11.
thamud denied [their prophet] by reason of their transgression,
12.
when the most wretched of them was sent forth.1803
13.
and the messenger of allah [i.e., salih] said to them, "[do not 
harm] the she-camel of allah or [prevent her from] her drink."
14.
but they denied him and hamstrung1804 her.  so their lord 
brought down upon them destruction for their sin and made it 
equal [upon all of them].
15.
and he does not fear the consequence thereof.1805
                                               
1800ash-shams:  the sun.
1801the earth.  also interpreted as the sun.  the same applies to the following
verse.
1802i.e., balanced and refined it, creating in it sound tendencies and consciousness.
1803to hamstring the she-camel which had been sent by allah as a sign to them.
1804and then killed.
1805allah is not asked about what he does, but his servants will be asked.  
see 21:23.

surah 92 – al-layl
juz 30
638
surah al-layl
1806
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the night when it covers1807
2.
and [by] the day when it appears
3.
and [by] he who created the male and female,
4.
indeed, your efforts are diverse.
5.
as for he who gives and fears allah
6.
and believes in the best [reward],
7.
we will ease him toward ease.
8.
but as for he who withholds and considers himself free of need
9.
and denies the best [reward],
10.
we will ease him toward difficulty.
11.
and what will his wealth avail him when he falls?1808
12.
indeed, [incumbent] upon us is guidance.
13.
and indeed, to us belongs the hereafter and the first [life].
14.
so i have warned you of a fire which is blazing.
15.
none will [enter to] burn therein except the most wretched one
16.
who had denied and turned away.
17.
but the righteous one will avoid it –
18.
[he] who gives [from] his wealth to purify himself
19.
and not [giving] for anyone who has [done him] a favor to be 
rewarded1809
20.
but only seeking the countenance of his lord, most high.
21.
and he is going to be satisfied.
                                               
1806al-layl:  the night.
1807with darkness.
1808i.e., when he dies or is destroyed.  it can also mean when he falls into 
the hellfire.
1809i.e., without intending reciprocation for some benefit to himself.

surah 93 – adh-dhuha
juz 30
639
surah adh-dhuha
1810
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the morning brightness
2.
and [by] the night when it covers with darkness,1811
3.
your lord has not taken leave of you, [o muhammad], nor 
has he detested [you].
4.
and the hereafter is better for you than the first [life].
5.
and your lord is going to give you, and you will be satisfied.
6.
did he not find you an orphan and give [you] refuge?
7.
and he found you lost and guided [you],
8.
and he found you poor and made [you] self-sufficient.
9.
so as for the orphan, do not oppress [him].
10.
and as for the petitioner,1812 do not repel [him].
11.
but as for the favor of your lord, report [it].
                                               
1810adh-dhuha:  the morning brightness, i.e., the brightness or heat of the sun.
1811and becomes still.
1812anyone who seeks aid or knowledge.

surah 94 – ash-sharh
juz 30
640
surah ash-sharh
1813
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. did we not expand for you, [o muhammad], your breast?1814
2. and we removed from you your burden1815
3. which had weighed upon your back
4. and raised high for you your repute.
5. for indeed, with hardship [will be] ease [i.e., relief].
6. indeed, with hardship [will be] ease.
7. so when you have finished [your duties], then stand up [for 
worship].
8. and to your lord direct [your] longing.
                                               
1813ash-sharh or al-inshirah:  expansion.
1814i.e., enlighten, assure and gladden your heart with guidance.
1815by forgiving any errors which you may have committed previously or 
might commit consequently.  "burden" can also refer to the anxiety 
experienced by the prophet () at the beginning of his mission.

surah 95 – at-teen
juz 30
641
surah at-teen
1816
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. by the fig and the olive1817
2. and [by] mount sinai
3. and [by] this secure city [i.e., makkah],
4. we have certainly created man in the best of stature;1818
5. then we return him to the lowest of the low,1819
6. except for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for they 
will have a reward uninterrupted.
7. so what yet causes you to deny the recompense?1820
8. is not allah the most just of judges?
                                               
1816at-teen:  the fig.
1817referring to the places known for their production, i.e., damascus and 
jerusalem, respectively.  it could also refer to the fig and olive trees or 
to the fruits themselves.
1818i.e., upright, symmetrical, and balanced in form and nature.
1819this can refer to the depths of hell, to decrepit old age or to immorality.
1820more literally, "what makes you lie concerning it?"

surah 96 – al-alaq
juz 30
642
surah al-alaq
1821
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
recite in the name of your lord who created –
2.
created man from a clinging substance.
3.
recite, and your lord is the most generous –
4.
who taught by the pen –
5.
taught man that which he knew not.
6.
no!  [but] indeed, man transgresses
7.
because he sees himself self-sufficient.
8.
indeed, to your lord is the return.
9.
have you seen the one who forbids
10.
a servant when he prays?
11.
have you seen if he is upon guidance
12.
or enjoins righteousness?
13.
have you seen if he denies and turns away –
14.
does he not know that allah sees?
15.
no!  if he does not desist, we will surely drag him by the 
forelock1822 –
16.
a lying, sinning forelock.
17.
then let him call his associates;
18.
we will call the angels of hell.1823
19.
no!  do not obey him.  but prostrate and draw near [to allah].
                                               
1821al-alaq:  the clinging (or suspended) substance.  the surah has also 
been called iqra, meaning "recite" or "read."
1822it may also mean "slap him" or "blacken his face at the forelock."
1823those who push the wicked into the fire.

surah 97 – al-qadr
juz 30
643
surah al-qadr
1824
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. indeed, we sent it [i.e., the quran] down during the night of 
decree.
2. and what can make you know what is the night of decree?
3. the night of decree is better than a thousand months.
4. the angels and the spirit [i.e., gabriel] descend therein by 
permission of their lord for every matter.1825
5. peace it is1826 until the emergence of dawn.
                                               
1824al-qadr:  decree or destiny.  other meanings are "precise measurement 
[i.e., amount or extent]," "value," "gravity" or "greatness."
1825they bring down the decree for everything destined to occur in the 
coming year.
1826upon the believers.

surah 98 – al-bayyinah
juz 30
644
surah al-bayyinah
1827
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. those who disbelieved among the people of the scripture and 
the polytheists were not to be parted [from misbelief]1828 until 
there came to them clear evidence –
2. a messenger from allah, reciting purified1829 scriptures
3. within which are correct writings [i.e., rulings and laws].
4. nor did those who were given the scripture become divided1830
until after there had come to them clear evidence.
5. and they were not commanded except to worship allah, [being] 
sincere to him in religion, inclining to truth, and to establish 
prayer and to give zakah.  and that is the correct religion.
6. indeed, they who disbelieved among the people of the scripture 
and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell, abiding eternally 
therein.  those are the worst of creatures.
7. indeed, they who have believed and done righteous deeds –
those are the best of creatures.
8. their reward with allah will be gardens of perpetual residence 
beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever, 
allah being pleased with them and they with him.  that is for 
whoever has feared his lord.
                                               
1827al-bayyinah:  clear evidence.
1828i.e., from their erroneous beliefs and superstitions.
1829i.e., containing no falsehood.
1830into sects and denominations.

surah 99 – az-zalzalah
juz 30
645
surah az-zalzalah
1831
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. when the earth is shaken with its [final] earthquake
2. and the earth discharges its burdens1832
3. and man says,1833 "what is [wrong] with it?" –
4. that day, it will report its news
5. because your lord has inspired [i.e., commanded] it.
6. that day, the people will depart1834 separated [into categories] 
to be shown [the result of] their deeds.
7. so whoever does an atom's weight1835 of good will see it,
8. and whoever does an atom's weight of evil will see it.
                                               
1831az-zalzalah:  the earthquake.
1832see verse 84:4.
1833in terror and amazement.
1834from the place of judgement to their final abode.  another interpretation is 
"emerge separately" (from the graves).
1835or "the weight of a small ant."

surah 100 – al-aadiyat
juz 30
646
surah al-aadiyat
1836
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
by the racers, panting,1837
2.
and the producers of sparks [when] striking1838
3.
and the chargers at dawn,1839
4.
stirring up thereby [clouds of] dust,
5.
arriving thereby in the center1840 collectively,
6.
indeed mankind, to his lord, is ungrateful.
7.
and indeed, he is to that a witness.1841
8.
and indeed he is, in love of wealth, intense.
9.
but does he not know that when the contents of the graves are 
scattered
10.
and that within the breasts is obtained,1842
11.
indeed, their lord with them, that day, is [fully] acquainted.
                                               
1836al-aadiyat:  the racers.
1837i.e., the horses of those fighting for allah's cause as they race to attack 
the enemy.
1838their hoofs while galloping over rocky terrain.
1839while the enemy is unaware.
1840i.e., penetrating into the enemy ranks during a surprise attack.
1841through his speech and his actions.
1842i.e., when all secrets are made known.

surah 101 – al-qariah
juz 30
647
surah al-qariah
1843
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1.
the striking calamity –
2.
what is the striking calamity?
3.
and what can make you know what is the striking calamity?
4.
it is the day when people will be like moths, dispersed,1844
5.
and the mountains will be like wool, fluffed up.1845
6.
then as for one whose scales are heavy [with good deeds],
7.
he will be in a pleasant life.
8.
but as for one whose scales are light,
9.
his refuge1846 will be an abyss.1847
10.
and what can make you know what that is?
11.
it is a fire, intensely hot.
                                               
1843al-qariah:  that which strikes or the sudden calamity, another name 
for the resurrection.
1844the people will be as such after having been expelled from their graves.
1845i.e., beginning to disintegrate.
1846literally, "mother" (a man's original refuge), which will envelop him as 
in an embrace.
1847i.e., the pit of hellfire.

surah 102 – at-takathur
juz 30
648
surah at-takathur
1848
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. competition in [worldly] increase diverts you
2. until you visit the graveyards.1849
3. no!  you are going to know.
4. then, no!  you are going to know.
5. no!  if you only knew with knowledge of certainty...1850
6. you will surely see the hellfire.
7. then you will surely see it with the eye of certainty.1851
8. then you will surely be asked that day about pleasure.1852
                                               
1848at-takathur:  competition in increase.
1849i.e., remain in them temporarily, meaning until the day of resurrection.
1850the conclusion of this verse is estimated to be "...you would not have 
been distracted from preparing for the hereafter."
1851i.e., with actual eyesight.
1852i.e., the comforts of worldly life and whether you were grateful to allah 
for his blessings.

surah 103 – al-asr
juz 30
649
surah al-asr
1853
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. by time,1854
2. indeed, mankind is in loss,
3. except for those who have believed and done righteous deeds and 
advised each other to truth and advised each other to patience.
                                               
1853al-asr:  time.
1854an oath in which allah swears by time throughout the ages.

surah 104 – al-humazah
juz 30
650
surah al-humazah
1855
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. woe to every scorner and mocker
2. who collects wealth and [continuously] counts it.1856
3. he thinks that his wealth will make him immortal.
4. no!  he will surely be thrown into the crusher.1857
5. and what can make you know what is the crusher?
6. it is the fire of allah, [eternally] fueled,
7. which mounts directed at the hearts.1858
8. indeed, it [i.e., hellfire] will be closed down upon them
9. in extended columns.1859
                                               
1855al-humazah:  the scorner.
1856rather than spending in the way of allah.
1857i.e., hellfire, which crushes and destroys all that enters it.
1858covering them and penetrating them.
1859interpreted to be either columns of fire or columns of iron to which are 
chained the inmates of hell.

surah 105 – al-fil
juz 30
651
surah al-fil
1860
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. have you not considered, [o muhammad], how your lord dealt 
with the companions of the elephant?1861
2. did he not make their plan into misguidance?1862
3. and he sent against them birds in flocks,
4. striking them with stones of hard clay,
5. and he made them like eaten straw.1863
                                               
1860al-fil:  the elephant.
1861i.e., the army under the command of abrahah al-ashram which was 
accompanied by a huge elephant and came with the intention of destroying
the kabah at makkah.
1862causing them to perish.
1863i.e., husks which have been chewed by cattle.  this event took place in 
the year of the prophet's birth.

surah 106 – quraysh
juz 30
652
surah quraysh
1864
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. for the accustomed security of the quraysh1865 –
2. their accustomed security [in] the caravan of winter and 
summer1866 –
3. let them worship the lord of this house,1867
4. who has fed them, [saving them] from hunger and made them 
safe, [saving them] from fear.
                                               
1864quraysh:  (the tribe of) quraysh.
1865i.e., the honor and reputation allah had given them as guardians of the 
holy kabah, which allowed them to travel without fear of being harmed.
1866i.e., the trading caravans that traveled south in winter and north in summer.
1867i.e., the kabah.

surah 107 – al-maun
juz 30
653
surah al-maun
1868
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. have you seen the one who denies the recompense?
2. for that is the one who drives away the orphan
3. and does not encourage the feeding of the poor.
4. so woe to those who pray
5. [but] who are heedless of their prayer1869 –
6. those who make show [of their deeds]
7. and withhold [simple] assistance.
                                               
1868al-maun:  assistance.
1869i.e., the hypocrites who are unconcerned if they miss prayers when no 
one sees them.

surah 108 – al-kawthar
juz 30
654
surah al-kawthar
1870
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. indeed, we have granted you, [o muhammad], al-kawthar.
2. so pray to your lord and sacrifice [to him alone].
3. indeed, your enemy is the one cut off.1871
                                               
1870al-kawthar:  literally, "the most abundant good."  also, a river in paradise.
1871from all good in this world and the hereafter.

surah 109 – al-kafirun
juz 30
655
surah al-kafirun
1872
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. say, "o disbelievers,
2. i do not worship what you worship.
3. nor are you worshippers of what i worship.
4. nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship.
5. nor will you be worshippers of what i worship.
6. for you is your religion, and for me is my religion."
                                               
1872al-kafirun:  the disbelievers.  the prophet () mentioned that this 
surah is disassociation from shirk (worship of anything other than allah) 
for him who recites it.  (narrated by ahmad, ab´ dawud and at-tirmidhi –
hasan.)

surah 110 – an-nasr
juz 30
656
surah an-nasr
1873
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. when the victory of allah has come and the conquest,1874
2. and you see the people entering into the religion of allah in 
multitudes,
3. then exalt [him] with praise of your lord and ask forgiveness 
of him.  indeed, he is ever accepting of repentance.
                                               
1873an-nasr:  victory.
1874the conquest of makkah.

surah 111 – al-masad
juz 30
657
surah al-masad
1875
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. may the hands of ab´ lahab be ruined, and ruined is he.1876
2. his wealth will not avail him or that which he gained.
3. he will [enter to] burn in a fire of [blazing] flame
4. and his wife [as well] – the carrier of firewood.1877
5. around her neck is a rope of [twisted] fiber.
                                               
1875al-masad:  fiber.  this surah is also known as al-lahab (flame).
1876ab´ lahab (the prophet's uncle), who was an enemy of islam.
1877she used to put thorns in the prophet's path and slander him ().  the 
word "firewood" was used by the arabs to allude to slander and backbiting.

surah 112 – al-ikhlas
juz 30
658
surah al-ikhlas
1878
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. say, "he is allah, [who is] one,1879
2. allah, the eternal refuge.1880
3. he neither begets nor is born,
4. nor is there to him any equivalent."
                                               
1878al-ikhlas:  purification, i.e., the purification of faith – the surah's theme.  
in narrations by al-bukhari and ahmad, the prophet () described this 
surah as being equivalent to one third of the quran.
1879i.e., single, unique and indivisible.
1880i.e., the one sought in times of difficulty and need, the one depended 
upon by all existence.

surah 113 – al-falaq
juz 30
659
surah al-falaq
1881
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. say, "i seek refuge in the lord of daybreak
2. from the evil of that which he created
3. and from the evil of darkness when it settles
4. and from the evil of the blowers in knots1882
5. and from the evil of an envier when he envies."
                                               
1881al-falaq:  daybreak.  this and the following surah were revealed together 
and are recited when seeking allah's protection from all kinds of evil.
1882i.e., those who practice magic.

surah 114 – an-nas
juz 30
660
surah an-nas
1883
bismillahir-rahmanir-raheem
1. say, "i seek refuge in the lord of mankind,
2. the sovereign of mankind,
3. the god of mankind,
4. from the evil of the retreating whisperer1884 –
5. who whispers [evil] into the breasts of mankind –
6. from among the jinn and mankind."1885
                                               
1883an-nas:  people or mankind.
1884i.e., a devil who makes evil suggestions to man but disappears when one 
remembers allah.
1885evil prompters may be from men as well as from jinn.

